<title>James Wechsler vs. Kerouac - "The Age of Unthink"</title>
<BODY bgcolor=FFFFFF text=000000 link=FF0000 vlink=0000FF>

<h1>                              JAMES WECHSLER </h1>

<h1>"The Age of Unthink" </h1>

<i>Note: This chapter from James Wechsler's "Reflections of an Angry
Middle-Aged Editor" records Wechler's frustrating confrontation with Jack
Kerouac in 1958.  Other chapters of the book) are entitled, "Is Everybody
Happy?", "The Liberal Retreat," and "Life Of a Salesman." </i><p>
<p>

TWO SEPARATE episodes inspired the reflections that led to the writing of
this book, and perhaps it is appropriate to begin by recalling them.  <p>

On the evening of November 6, 1958, I took part in a symposium on the Beat
Generation at Hunter College.  The event, if it may be so described, was
sponsored by Brandeis University; the other participants were 
<a href=http://qanda.encyclopedia.com/question/jack-kerouac-290456.html>Jack
Kerouac</a>, author of <a href=../88/onroad.html><i>On the Road</i></a> and 
self-proclaimed voice of the Beat
Generation; Kingsley Amis, the talented, witty British writer who admits
to being neither young nor angry but has been so labeled on two
continents; and Professor Ashley Montagu, the noted anthropologist.  <p>

I almost missed the meeting, proving that books, like other productions,
are prey to the accident of history.  It occurred just two days after the
state elections of that year; I was still tired, if not beat, and the
prospect of a long evening of recitation and listening seemed less
congenial than, say, watching a basketball game at Madison Square Garden.  <p>

But I had a certain curiosity about Kerouac, whom I had never seen, and about
the subject, which I had heard discussed with increasing frequency and
earnestness by my son (then sixteen) and some of his friends.  In fact I
had begun to feel out of touch.  So, though ill-prepared to deliver a
speech (and even less prepared for what happened), I reached the
auditorium a few moments after Kerouac had begun what turned out to be a
forty-minute rendition, and there was more than one reprise.  <p>

My first astonishment was the size of the audience.  As one apparently
addicted to public speech since an early age, I have grown accustomed to
addressing empty seats as well as uplifted drowsy countenances.  I had
steeled myself for the sight of unoccupied leather.  Instead, on arrival
at the entrance, I discovered that this was what is known in the trade as
<img src=kerouac-jack.jpg align=left>
an SRO affair, with scores of young people milling around outside the
auditorium in the vain hope that the capacity of the hall would be
expanded by the rhetoric inside.  <p>

Having forgotten there  was a stage  entrance, I proceeded at once  
to the main door where a strong-minded young woman effectively 
barred the way.  The meeting had begun and I tried perhaps 
impatiently to tell her I  was  one  of  the scheduled performers; at 
first this evoked  almost no reaction except massive resistance. I 
could not tell whether she thought I was an impostor or whether she  
had been intimidated by the Fire Department;  anyway, after producing  
my  press  card and adopting a tone of entreaty rattier than 
insistence, I was finally admitted. <p>

As I walked a trifle uncomfortably down the center aisle to the stage, I
got my first view of the leader of the Beat Generation. He was attired in
a lumberjack shirt unadorned by tie, but there was nothing especially
ostentatious about his lack of dress. A little more flabbergasting was the
discovery that he was holding what proved to be a glass of brandy, and
throughout the evening lie made several trips to the wings for a refill. 
Kerouac acknowledged my arrival by observing, "You ruined my sentence,"
and then resumed a discourse which I am obliged to describe as a stream of
semiconsciousness.  <p>

The audience was predominantly, if not exclusively, young -ranging from
high-school students to college seniors, and with a sprinkling of the
middle-aged and the old.  With due reverence for Messrs.  Amis, Montagu
and myself, a large proportion of those present had obviously come to see
and hear Kerouac, which, after all, explained my own belated presence too. 
There was plainly a bloc of the committed beat reveling in each of his
mischievous irrelevancies and with whom he used a kind of sign language
mystifying to outsiders; there were also what might be called the fellow
travelers of the beat, some of whom manifested bewilderment and even
impatience with the Leader by the time the evening had ended.  There were,
also, no doubt some who had just come for the show.  <p>

I cannot recall as large an assemblage of young people except for the
captive audiences of school assemblies-since the radical heyday of the
thirties.  The beat, of course, do not carry membership cards and one has
no way of knowing how many true disciples were recruited or disaffected by
Kerouac's chaotic exhibition. But the size of the turnout was
extraordinary.  <p>

Having listened to a recording of the evening's proceedings and pondered a
transcript, I still find myself largely out of Kerouac's reach. I am,
admittedly, eight years older than he-forty-three to his thirty-five the
night of the symposium at Hunter-but such a gap is not normally considered
prohibitive among adults. I was on speaking terms with a lot of men some
years younger than Kerouac.  Moreover I brought no instinctive hostility
to the occasion (toward the end, in one of his most coherent thrusts, lie
cried, "You came here prepared to attack me," but in fact I had come, as
previously indicated, utterly unprepared, period).  <p>

There were times when he sounded like a jaded traveling salesman telling
obscene bedtime stories to the young;  there were others when the
melancholy of his cadences achieved a mildly hypnotic effect, so that one
listened to it as if hearing an obscure but appealing fragment of music. 
There were also many intervals that can only be described as gibberish. 
Thus at one point he was chanting (and I quote from the transcript):  <p>
<blockquote>
In fact here is a poem I've written about Harpo Marx: <p>
<pre>
        Harpo, I'll always love you.
	Oh Harpo, when did you seem like an angel the last and played the
		gray harp of gold?
	When did you steal the silverware and buckspray the guests?
	When did your brother find rain in your sunny courtyard?
	When did you chase your last blond across a millionaire's lawn
		with a bait hook on a line protruding from your bicycle?
	Oh, when last you powderpuffed your white flower face with a fish
		barrel cover?
	Harpo, who is that lion I saw you with? ... <p>
</pre></blockquote>
Without questioning the place of Harpo Marxism in history, I find little
rhyme or reason in these observations, and the Leader drooped to the
dimensions of ham.  The totality of his performance, brightened as it was
by flashes of imagery, was a union of madness and sadness;  by the end the
occasional vivid or moving phrase seemed like an isolated line of poetry
surrounded by vulgar ramblings on a latrine wall.  <p>

Kerouac is dark-haired and sturdily built (he played football for a year
for Lou Little at Columbia and, when lie quit, the coach said
prophetically that the "boy was tired").  He has rather graceful gestures; 
he alternates murmurs of flirtive sexuality with intimations of high
piety.  He deftly evokes the emotional loyalty of those who feel that they
too are beat. It is no irreverence, I trust, to say that at moments lie
might have been called the Billy Gloomy-Sunday of our time.  <p>

Did we ever establish any communication?  I think we did; at least there
is no other way I can explain the furious feeling he exhibited in the
exchange that took place after the allegedly prepared recitals had
occurred.  <p>
<blockquote>
KEROUAC:...James Wechsler...Who's James Wechsler?  Right over there. 
James Wechsler, you believe in the destruction of America, don't you?  <p>

WECHSLER: No. (The transcript added "laughter.") <p>

KEROUAC:  What do you believe in, come here, come here and tell me what
you believe in ...You told me what you don't believe in.  I want to know
what you do believe in. (Cries from the audience:  "That's right.") This
is a university, we've got to learn . . . I believe in love, I vote for
love (applause).  <p>
</blockquote>
It was rather difficult to avoid a pretentious reply:  <p>
<blockquote>
WECHSLER: I believe in the capacity of the human intelligence to create a
world in which there is love, compassion, justice and freedom.  I believe
in fighting for that kind of world. I think what you are doing is to try
to destroy anybody's instinct to care about this world.  <p>

KEROUAC: I believe, I believe in the dove of peace.  <p>

WECHSLER: So do I.  <p>

KEROUAC:  No you don't.  You're fighting with me for the dove of peace.
You came here prepared to attack me.  <p>
</blockquote>
It went on for a little while longer and then the chairman mercifully
explained that it was very late, and in truth it was a few minutes after
ten.  <p>

There is no point in indefinitely prolonging the reportorial agony.  This
was hardly a debate in which anyone could have scored the points; I was
grappling with a man in outer space, and it was only for the briefest of
intervals that we even seemed to occupy the same mat.  I shall never quite
understand why he assumed I had come there with a plot, or even why he
responded so angrily to a minor quip I made at President Eisenhower's
expense, this being a time when even Republican newspapers were ceasing to
regard Eisenhower as above criticism.  <p>

Kerouac had observed, if that is the proper term:  <p>
<blockquote>
Well, Mr.  Wechsler, I was sitting under a tangerine tree in Florida one
afternoon and I was trying to translate the Diamond Sutra from Sanskrit to
English and I said shall I call it a personal god or an impersonal god,
and at that moment a little tangerine dropped out of the tree and they
only drop out of a tree about once every six weeks and landed right square
in the middle of my head.  Right, boing;  I said, okay, personal god.  <p>
</blockquote>
Somewhat testily I interjected:  <p>
<blockquote>
I just want to say, Mr.  Kerouac, that as an editor I have to write about
Dwight D.  Eisenhower's press conference every week-- <p>

KEROUAC (interrupting): He's very witty-- <p>

WECHSLER:--and it's possible to reduce life to an area of so little sense
that there would hardly be any reason for all these people to have come
here tonight, or for us to be here. I don't think we render any service by
doing that-- <p>

KEROUAC: Education is education.  <p>

WECHSLER:  Well, as Eisenhower would say government is government.  <p>

KEROUAC: And as Dulles would say, statesmanship is statesmanship.  <p>
</blockquote>
For that small moment we seemed like two quarreling editorial writers
occupying the same planet.  <p>

Dr.  Joseph Kauffman, the soft-voiced moderator, gently interpolated that
"the point which Mr.  Wechsler makes is one which is fairly commonly held
among people who are considered activists in the sense of social and
political action." <p>

In what I must characterize as a growl Kerouac responded: "Don't give me that stuff.  I'm going out of
this atmosphere." <p>

In a sense, that is the last I saw of him.<p>

What I had tried to say was embodied in an earlier statement that evening; 
since it is rather awkwardly relevant to the conception of this book,
perhaps some words of it should be published here:  <p>
<blockquote>
"It is a strange thing to participate in this symposium because I guess
that I am one of the few unreconstructed radicals of my generation, and
much of what has happened in the last twenty and twenty-five years has
challenged many of the things that I believe- in deeply.  Yet my basic
sense about what I care about in the world, what I fight for, what I
believe in is remarkably unaltered.  <p>

"I have to say to you that, with due respect to Mr.  Kerouac, I see no
really major point in this kind of organized confusionism . . .  To me the
astonishing thing, after all these years of our time and our century which
have been brutal, cruel and difficult years, is that we can still find, if
I may say so, a Boris Pasternak, and he is only a name and a symbol; but
that all over the world there does seem to be a sense of the survival of
human values and decency which seem to me to be the only things that give
meaning to life ...  <p>

"The impressive fact is that there survives and that there recurs and is
renewed among young kids all over the world the sense that there are
values of decency worth fighting for and even giving one's life for.  <p>

"There was a man named Felix Cohen who died when he was forty-six.  He was
the son of Morris Raphael Cohen and he wrote a great essay which has meant
a great deal to me in my life in which he argued that the astonishing
thing about our world is that, given all the travail and the turmoil and
the sadness, it does seem to be true that certain ethical values do
re-emerge and that children grow up sensing them and understanding them.  <p>

"I do not happen to be a religious man in any conventional sense but I do
have the sense that what gives meaning to life is the survival of these
values. And so it is that there are people all the time all over the world
who, when they see cruelty and injustice and intolerance and bigotry often
risk many things to fight against these incredible conditions.  Now I know
there is a view that this is probably because they were dropped on their
heads when they were small children.  But I thought Arthur Koestler
answered that point rather well when he said that, if we really believed
that the only people who have any decent instincts in the world are those
who were dropped on their heads when they were babies, it's very hard to
make any sense out of life ...  <p>

"I think there are values that have transcended these difficult and
complicated conditions of human existence.  It is a sad thing about
America now that what is regarded as the great revolt and the great
representation of dissent and unorthodoxy is what is called the beat
generation.  Because I guess it has very little meaning to me and, after
listening to its spokesman tonight, I must say that I find myself groping
in the darkest confusion as to what the hell this is about (from audience: 
"Shame on you").  (Laughter and applause.) There is the right, thank God,
for all of us to scream and shout and do anything we damn please in
public.  There is also, I think, the responsibility for us to try to give
to the people in our society some sense of what matters and what is
important and what we care about.  <p>

"People say so often that there are no issues any longer, that everything
was settled by the New Deal and the Fair Deal, and that there really
aren't any great differences in political life.  To some extent that's
true.  Yet we live in a time when there are two things that seem to me to
be worthy of everything within us.  <p>

"One is the fact that there is something called the hydrogen bomb which
can make a mockery of anything we call civilization.  The other is the
quest for human equality which has become the dominant and decisive issue
of our lifetime in America. So it never has seemed to me really that there
is nothing left to fight for, or that there is nothing worth arguing about
in our society." <p>
</blockquote>
There were far better words spoken that evening by both Dr. Amis and
Professor Montagu than any recited by Kerouac or myself.  <p>

Dr. Amis suggested amiably but pointedly that there was no genuine union
between the so-called angry young men of Great Britain, who had at least
voiced a certain definable- and not monolithic-protest against the
grayness of life, and the rambling wrecks from American Tech -.who had
ostentatiously proclaimed themselves the beat generation.  <p>

Professor Montagu, perhaps because he had not been accused of being angry,
perhaps because an anthropologist acquires a certain occupational patience
with the eccentricities of man, spoke with the greatest compassion: "What
I am trying to say is that it is not condemnation or contempt that is
called for but compassion and understanding, that the beat generation is
not something either to bemoan or disown but a suffering confusion of
human beings crying out for sympathetic understanding.  The beat
generation represents the ultimate expression of a civilization whose
moral values have broken down and in many ways, what is even worse, a
civilization with little faith or conviction in the values it professes to
believe. (From audience: "Right!") <p>
<blockquote>
"Its ideal values are one thing.  But its real values-the values by which
it lives-are quite another.  Our ideal and our real values are in
conflict.  The Sermon on the Mount and the principle of competition are
simply not compatible with one another. And this fact gives rise to the
great hypocrisy of a society that preaches the one and lives by the other,
and it gives rise, among other things, to a demoralization of the sort
which results in beatniks.  <p>

"Human beings living in a society in which such mutually irreconcilable,
such conflicting and false values are dominant are likely to be confused
and confusing.  Those who subscribe to such values damage not only
themselves but wreak havoc upon their children, many of whom constitute
members of the beat generation.  <p>

"The beatniks know that there is too much that is wrong with the
non-beatniks, but they are thoroughly confused as to why it is that what
is wrong is wrong.  Their cult of unthink is of no help, nor is resort to
esoteric cults and Eastern religion.  <p>

"Whatever it is they're in revolt against we must take care that the
anarchy that is so apparent in the beat generation is not mistaken for
anything oilier than it is, namely a signal of distress, a cry for love, a
refusal to accept defeat at the hands of the unloving lovers who made them
what they are.  <p>

"We owe a debt of gratitude to the beat writers for so forcefully
articulating what the less vocal members of this generation feel and
think." <p>
</blockquote>
In the anarchy of the evening these were the most generous and thoughtful
phrases, and they were plainly addressed to an audience beyond the
gathering of the moment.  They created a stillness and reserve that had
been lacking throughout the previous recitations, as if even the most
frenetic Kerouacians had been persuaded for the instant to think of
themselves in a larger context. But I suppose there were also those who
whispered to themselves and their neighbors that Professor Montagu was an
amiable square who just wasn't getting enough kicks.  <p>

At the end there was the usual flurry around the platform and I did not
get a chance to talk to Kerouac again.  We probably would not have had
much to say to each other. I felt both very young and very old:  young, in
the sense that it seemed to me I found life less overwhelming than Kerouac
did, and old because I knew I could not offer any simplicities comparable
to his platform of raucous hedonism.  <p>

At the start I noted there were two incidents which quite coincidentally
provoked this book.  One was the Kerouac affair; the other was a small
gathering in a suite at the Hotel Commodore in New York just a few weeks
later.  <p>

This was an informal session arranged by Joseph L. Rauh Jr., who had for
some eleven years been the solid pillar of an organization known as
Americans for Democratic Action, an enterprise perhaps more celebrated for
the attacks leveled against it in the conservative press than for any
political revolutions it has truly engineered.  Rauh was what Heywood
Broun must have had in mind when he referred to the species "congenital
liberal";  a large, warm, forceful and resourceful man who was probably
more responsible than any other individual for the sustained existence of
those formidable initials ADA, not to be confused with the American Dental
Association.  <p>

The subject of the gathering might have been summed up quite simply as: 
where do we go from here, or, what are we up to, anyway?  After more than
a decade of life ADA was accepted in right-wing political circles as a
major menace and regarded with almost equal anxiety by many liberal
politicians who feared someone would remember they had once been
associated with it.  Certain views as to the circumstances which produced
this unhappy state of the organization will be examined later, as well as
some of the self-appraisals advanced at this assemblage.  <p>

In the aftermath of the Kerouac episode what struck me most as we met was
that tile youngest man in this room was <a href=schlesinger-bio.html>Arthur 
Schlesinger, Jr.</a>, who had just passed his fortieth birthday.  <p>

The roll call of those present is less important than the knowledge that
there was not among us a single person representing the generation born
between 1925 and 1935.  Possibly this discovery was especially poignant
for those of us who had once been identified as leaders of "the youth
movement." Yet perhaps it also underlined an even more striking American
occurrence, which is that those of us who had the good or bad fortune to
become twenty in the 1930's have been granted a certain immortality by the
nonemergence of younger voices.  In an essay in </i>The New Leader</i>'s symposium
on the Young Generation [later included in <i>The End of Ideology</i>], 
Dan Bell put the matter quite 
entertainingly.  <p>

Having joined the Young People's socialist League in 1932 at the advanced
age of thirteen, he noted, and graduated from CCNY in 1938, he found
himself being described nearly twenty years later as a "young
sociologist." Pitilessly documenting the point that we were in that
strange condition where life seemed to begin at forty, he added:  <p>
<blockquote>
Some years ago Harvey Swados, then about 38, published an exciting first
novel and was called a promising "young" writer;  Richard Hofstadter who,
at the age of 42, has published four or five first-rate historical
interpretations, is called a young American scholar;  James Wechsler, over
40, a young editor;  Saul Bellow, over 40, a young American novelist; 
Alfred Kazin, 41, a young American critic, etc.  <p>
</blockquote>
All that was published in April, 1957, and we youths are now that much
older.  We have even been called "grouchy middle-aged men," but by and
large we retain a kind of immunity from underage attack if only because we
manage to make more tumultuous sounds than those born ten or twenty years
later.  <p>

Time plays harsh tricks. Even as I write this I am conscious that some who
will read it do not know what it meant to be on this earth during the
<a href=http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/88/spain-home.html>Spanish Civil War</a>, 
when at last there 
was an international brigade composed of men prepared to risk their lives for the salvation of mankind,
and for no private or provincial cause.  A young man of twenty-five was
four when all that occur-red, as I was four when the Treaty of Versailles
was signed.  <p>

To establish any continuity is hard enough.  Yet I venture to say that as
a youth of twenty I felt no large gap between myself and those who--when I
was twelve--had been engaged in the effort to save the lives of two
unheralded human beings named 
<a href=http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/88/sacvan.html>Sacco and Vanzetti</a>.  As I grew up their 
lost cause had become mine, and I felt no difficulty about comprehending the
depth of feeling my elders associated with it.  <p>

The beatnik proclaims his alienation and his irresponsibility, and his
contempt for those who have the effrontery to seek to influence the
affairs of men or establish order in the gone universe. But no single
voice really speaks for him. Kerouac at Hunter was a caricature of the
breed;  on another evening in a different setting at Columbia, Allen
Ginsberg (whom Kerouac had dragged onto the stage like a circus donkey
the night of our meeting) recited poetry in a fashion that Diana Trilling
found extraordinarily moving and intelligible, and led her to feel pity
rattier than disdain for him and his cohorts.  She added:  "Whatever one's
view of the poetry, the manners, the compulsive disreputableness and the
sometimes ostentatious homosexuality of those who term themselves beat, it
is perhaps most noteworthy that their form of protest is almost wholly
nonpolitical, and at moments a rebellion against politics itself." <p>

The ranks of the beat are limited and scattered.  It is hardly likely that
what they are up to would evoke so much notice if most of their
contemporaries were engaged in great exercises;  what gives them part of
their prominence-as it did "the lost" of the 1920's and the radicals of
the 1930's--is that they almost alone seem to care very deeply, even if it
is about the cult of not caring.  If their escapades are tinged with
exhibitionism and even vulgarity, they create a certain fascination
because they at least seem to be crazily alive while so many others are
just going through the motions.  Their commitment to disaffection is
intense.  <p>

Perhaps they interest us, too, because politics seems to have become less
and less relevant to many of the young people growing up in the land, and
among the beat the estrangement is most fully burlesqued.  <p>

We have never had political youth movements comparable to those of Europe
and Latin America.  Some three decades ago Harold Laski was asking "Why
Don't Your Young Men Care?" and even in the turbulent 1930's the number of
activists in Communist and Socialist enterprises, not to speak of the
major parties, was far smaller than it has often appeared in retrospect
(although their experiences touched a wider fragment of their generation
than may have been realized at the time).  In any case what we are now
encountering is large-scale disassociation.  Many young men and women who
enter politics do so with a view to their own political careers, rather
than out of any tenacious conviction;  the local reform movements of today
too frequently become the entrenched bureaucracies of tomorrow.  <p>

This book does not presume to offer any definitive judgment about the
beat. Rather, as indicated at the start, they are the catalyst for some
random discussion of the state of "beatness" amid which most of the
politics of the day is conducted, of the failures of political leaders to
impart any quality of excitement and e1an to their endeavors;  and for an
affirmation and elaboration of certain positions which, I trust, form some
basis for a political revival.  <p>

It is not the kids with beards and blue jeans, "many of them publicly
homosexual, talking about or taking drugs, assuring us they are out of
their minds, not responsible," in Mrs. Trilling's words, about whom this
is primarily written.  Rattier it is about the young fogies, the minor
Machiavellis, the gray-flanneled status seekers, the modern Republicans
and the "realistic" Democrats, the tired liberals and ex-Communists turned
raucous patrioteers, and the "men of moderation" in whose hands great
issues have become great bores. Possibly this look at things will
parenthetically explain what the rest of us look like to the beat and why
it is they seem so self-righteously convinced that it is their elders who
are the sad specimens.  <p>

<li><a href=../88/onroad.html>Excerpt</a> from <i>On the Road</i>.
<li><a 
href=http://www.writing.upenn.edu/cgi-bin/88search?query=Kerouac>Search 
for all instances of "Kerouac" in modern American poetry web site</a>

<!--blah--> <p> <hr> <center><b>
<!-- Google CSE Search Box Begins  -->
  <form id="searchbox_002685536534722764548:dtbbvc0eg1g" action="http://www.google.com/cse">
    <input type="hidden" name="cx" value="002685536534722764548:dtbbvc0eg1g" />
    <input type="hidden" name="cof" value="FORID:0" />
    <input name="q" type="text" size="40" />
    <input type="submit" name="sa" value="Search" />
  </form>
  <script type="text/javascript" src="http://www.google.com/coop/cse/brand?form=searchbox_002685536534722764548%3Adtbbvc0eg1g"></script>
<!-- Google CSE Search Box Ends -->
 <a href=home.html>50s HOME</a> | <a
href=readinglist.html>READING LIST</a> | <a href=hot.html>NEWS</A> | <A
HREF=../home.html>FILREIS HOME</a></b> </center> <hr><p> Document URL:
http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/50s/wechsler-unthink.html<br> Last
modified: Monday, 24-Aug-2009 14:31:51 EDT

