<title>Bellow's review of Ellison</title>
<BODY bgcolor=FFFFFF text=000000 link=FF0000 vlink=0000FF>
<center>
<h1>"Man Underground"</h1>

<h2>Review of Ralph Ellison's <i>Invisible Man</i> </h2>

<h3>by Saul Bellow</h3>

published in <i>Commentary</i> (June 1952) <p>

(pp. 608-610) <p>
</center>
<hr>
A few years ago, in an otherwise dreary and better forgotten number of 
Horizon devoted to a louse-up of life in the United States, I read with 
great excitement an episode from <i>Invisible Man</i>. It described a 
free-for-all of blindfolded Negro boys at a stag party of the leading 
citizens of a small Southern town. Before being blindfolded the boys are 
made to stare at a naked white woman; then they are herded into the ring, 
and, after the battle royal, one of the fighters, his mouth full of 
blood, is called upon to give his high school valedictorian's address. As 
he stands under the lights of the noisy room, the citizens rib him and 
make him repeat himself; an accidental reference to equality nearly ruins 
him, but everything ends well and he receives a handsome briefcase 
containing a scholarship to a Negro college. <p>

This episode, I thought, might well be the high point of an excellent 
novel. It has turned out to be not the high point but rather one of the 
many peaks of a book of the very first order, a superb book. The 
valedictorian is himself Invisible Man. He adores the college but is 
thrown out before long by its president, Dr. Bledsoe, a great educator 
and leader of his race, for permitting a white visitor to visit the wrong 
places in the vicinity. Bearing what he believes to be a letter of 
recommendation from Dr. Bledsoe he cornes to New York. The letter 
actually warns prospective employers against him. He is recruited by 
white radicals and becomes a Negro leader, and in the radical movement he 
learns eventually that throughout his entire life his relations with 
other men have been schematic; neither with Negroes nor with whites has 
he ever been visible, real. I think that in reading the Horizon excerpt I 
may have underestimated Mr. Ellison's arnbition and power for the 
following very good reason, that one is accustomed to expect excellent 
novels about boys, but a modern novel about men is exceedingly rare. For 
this enormously complex and difficult American experience of ours very 
few people are willing to make themselves morally and intellectually 
responsible. Consequently, maturity is hard to find. <p>

It is commonly felt that there is no strength to match the strength of 
those powers which attack and cripple modern mankind. And this feeling 
is, for the reader of modern fiction, all too often confirmed when he 
approaches a new book. He is prepared, skeptically, to find what he has 
found before, namely, that family and class, university, fashion, the 
giants of publicity and manufacture, have had a larger share in the 
creation of someone called a writer than truth or imaginationthat Bendix 
and Studebaker and the nylon division of Du Pont, and the University of 
Chicago, or Columbia or Harvard or Kenyon College, have once more proved 
mightier than the single soul of an individual; to find that one more 
lightly manned position has been taken. But what a great thing it is when 
a brilliant individual victory occurs, like Mr. Ellison's, proving that a 
truly heroic quality can exist among our contemporaries. People too 
thoroughly determined and our institutions by their size and force too 
thoroughly determinecan't approach this quality. That can only be done by 
those who resist the heavy influences and make their own synthesis out of 
the vast mass of phenomena, the seething, swarming body of appearances, 
facts, and details. From this harassment and threatened dissolution by 
details, a writer tries to rescue what is important. Even when he is most 
bitter, he makes by his tone a declaration of values and he says, in 
effect: There is something nevertheless that a man may hope to be. This 
tone, in the best pages of <i>Invisible Man</i>, those pages, for 
instance, in 
which an incestuous Negro farmer tells his tale to a white New England 
philanthropist, comes through very powerfully; it is tragi-comic, poetic, 
the tone of the very strongest sort of creative intelligence.
 In a time of specialized intelligences, modern imaginative writers make 
the effort to maintain themselves as unspecialists, and their quest is 
for a true middle-of-consciousness for everyone. What language is it that 
we can all speak, and what is it that we can all recognize, burn at, weep 
over, what is the stature we can without exaggeration claim for 
ourselves; what is the main address of consciousness? <p>

I was keenly aware, as I read this book, of a very significant kind of 
independence in the writing. For there is a way for Negro novelists to go 
at their problems, just as there are Jewish or Italian ways. Mr. Ellison 
has not adopted a minority tone. If he had done so, he would have failed 
to establish a true middle-of-consciousness for everyone. <p>

Negro Harlem is at once primitive and sophisticated; it exhibits the 
extremes of instinct and civilization as few other American communities 
do. If a writer dwells on the peculiarity of this, he ends with an exotic 
effect. And Mr. Ellison is not exotic. For him this balance of instinct 
and culture or civilization is not a Harlem matter; it is the matter, 
German, French, Russian, American, universal, a matter very little 
understood. It is thought that Negroes and other minority people, kept 
under in the great status battle, are in the instinct cellar of dark 
enjoyment. This imagined enjoyment provokes envious rage and murder; and 
then it is a large portion of human nature itself which becomes the 
fugitive murderously pursued. In our society ManHimselfis idolized and 
publicly worshipped, but the single individual must hide himself 
underground and try to save his desires, his thoughts, his soul, in 
invisibility. He must return to himself, learning self-acceptance and 
rejecting all that threatens to deprive him of his manhood. <p>

This is what I make of <i>Invisble Man</i>. It is not by any means 
faultless; I 
don't think the hero's experiences in the Communist party are as original 
in conception as other parts of the book, and his love affair with a 
white woman is all too brief, but it is an immensely moving novel and it  
has greatness. <p>

So many hands have been busy at the interment of the novelthe hand of 
Paul Valery, the hands of the editors of literary magazines, of scholars 
who decide when genres come and go, the hands of innumerable pip-squeaks 
as wellthat I cant help feeling elated when a resurrection occurs. People 
read history and then seem to feel that  everything has to CODclude in 
their own time. We have read history, and therefore history is over, they 
appear to say. Really, all that such critics have the right to say is 
that fine novels are few and far between; That's perfectly true. But then 
fine anythings are few and far between. If these Critics wanted to be 
extremely truthful, they'd say they were bored. Boredom, of course, like 
any rnighty force, you must respect. There is something terribly 
impressive about the boredom of a man like Valery who could no longer 
bear to read that the carriage had come for the duchess at four in the 
afternoon. And certainly there are some notably boring things to which we 
owe admiration of a sort. <p>

Not all the gravediggers of the novel have such distinction as Valery's, 
however. Hardly. And it's difficult to think of them as rising dazzled 
from a volume of Stendhal, exclaiming God! and then with angry 
determination seizing their shovels to go and heap more clods on the 
coffin. No, theirs unfortunately isn't often the disappointment of 
spirits formed under the influence of the masters. They make you wonder 
how, indeed, they would be satisfied. A recent contributor to _Partisan 
Review_, for instance, complains that modern fiction does not keep pace 
with his swift-wheeling modern consciousness which apparently leaves the 
photon far behind in its speed. He names a few really modern writers of 
fiction, their work unfortunately still unpublished, and makes a 
patronizing reference to Invisible Man: almost, but not quite, the real 
thing, it is raw and "overambitious." And the editors of __Partisan 
Review_ who have published so much of this modern fiction that their 
contributor attacks, what do they think of this? They do not say what 
they think; neither of this piece nor of another lulu on the same subject 
and in the same issue by John Aldridge. Mr. Aldridge writes: There are 
only two cultural pockets left in America; and they are the Deep South 
and that area of northeastern United States whose moral capital is 
Boston, Massachusetts. This is to say that these are the only places 
where there are any manners. In all other parts of the country people 
live in a kind of vastly standardized cultural prairie, a sort of 
infinite Middle West, and that means that they don't really live and they 
don't really do anything. <p>

Most Americans thus are Invisible. Can we wonder at thc cruelty of 
dictators when even a literary critic, without turning a hair. announces 
the death of a hundred rnillion people? Let us suppose that the novel is, 
as they say, played out. Let us only suppose it, for I don't believe it. 
But what if it is so? Will such tasks as Mr. Ellison has set himself no 
more be performed?  Nonsense. New means, when new means are necessary, 
will be found. To find them is easier than to suit the disappointed 
consciousness and to penetrate the thick walls of boredom within which 
life lies dying. <p>

<hr>
<li><a href=ellison-main.html>More</a> materials pertaining to
<i>Invisible 
Man</a>.


<!--blah--> <p> <hr> <center><b>
<!-- Google CSE Search Box Begins  -->
  <form id="searchbox_002685536534722764548:dtbbvc0eg1g" action="http://www.google.com/cse">
    <input type="hidden" name="cx" value="002685536534722764548:dtbbvc0eg1g" />
    <input type="hidden" name="cof" value="FORID:0" />
    <input name="q" type="text" size="40" />
    <input type="submit" name="sa" value="Search" />
  </form>
  <script type="text/javascript" src="http://www.google.com/coop/cse/brand?form=searchbox_002685536534722764548%3Adtbbvc0eg1g"></script>
<!-- Google CSE Search Box Ends -->
 <a href=home.html>50s HOME</a> | <a
href=readinglist.html>READING LIST</a> | <a href=hot.html>NEWS</A> | <A
HREF=../home.html>FILREIS HOME</a></b> </center> <hr><p> Document URL:
http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/50s/bellow-on-ellison.html<br> Last
modified: Thursday, 31-May-2007 09:42:45 EDT

