<html>

<head>

<title>Defoe, Apparation of Mrs. Veal</title>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="texts.css">

</head>

<body>

<h1 align="center">A Relation of the Apparition of Mrs. Veal</h1>

<h2 align="center">By Daniel Defoe</h2>

<blockquote>

Scanned by <a href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/">Jack
Lynch</a> from <em>The Novels and Miscellaneous Works of Daniel De
Foe</em>, ed. Sir Walter Scott, vol. 5 (Oxford, 1840).  Please
send corrections and comments to <a
href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/contact.html">Jack
Lynch</a>.

</blockquote>

<h2>The Preface</h2>

This relation is matter of fact, and attended with such
circumstances, as may induce any reasonable man to believe it. It
was sent by a gentleman, a justice of peace, at Maidstone, in
Kent, and a very intelligent person, to his friend in London, as
it is here worded; which discourse is attested by a very sober
and understanding gentlewoman, a kinswoman of the said
gentleman's, who lives in Canterbury, within a few doors of the
house in which the within-named Mrs. Bargrave lives; who believes
his kinswoman to be of so discerning a spirit, as not to be put
upon by any fallacy; and who positively assured him that the
whole matter, as it is related and laid down, is really true; and
what she herself had in the same words, as near as may be, from
Mrs. Bargrave's own mouth, who, she knows, had no reason to
invent and publish such a story, or any design to forge and tell
a lie, being a woman of much honesty and virtue, and her whole
life a course, as it were, of piety. The use which we ought to
make of it, is to consider, that there is a life to come after
this, and a just God, who will retribute to every one according
to the deeds done in the body; and therefore to reflect upon our
past course of life we have led in the world; that our time is
short and uncertain; and that if we would escape the punishment
of the ungodly, and receive the reward of the righteous, which is
the laying hold of eternal life, we ought, for the time to come,
to return to God by a speedy repentance, ceasing to do evil, and
learning to do well: to seek after God early, if happily he may
be found of us, and lead such lives for the future, as may be
well pleasing in his sight.

<hr>

<h2>A Relation of the Apparition of Mrs. Veal</h2>

This thing is so rare in all its circumstances, and on so good
authority, that my reading and conversation has not given me
anything like it: it is fit to gratify the most ingenious and
serious inquirer. Mrs. Bargrave is the person to whom Mrs. Veal
appeared after her death; she is my intimate friend, and I can
avouch for her reputation, for these last fifteen or sixteen
years, on my own knowledge; and I can confirm the good character
she had from her youth, to the time of my acquaintance. Though,
since this relation, she is calumniated by some people, that are
friends to the brother of this Mrs. Veal, who appeared; who think
the relation of this appearance to be a reflection, and endeavour
what they can to blast Mrs. Bargrave's reputation, and to laugh
the story out of countenance. But by the circumstances thereof,
and the cheerful disposition of Mrs. Bargrave, notwithstanding
the ill-usage of a very wicked husband, there is not yet the
least sign of dejection in her face; nor did I ever hear her let
fall a desponding or murmuring expression; nay, not when actually
under her husband's barbarity; which I have been witness to, and
several other persons of undoubted reputation.<p>

Now you must know, Mrs. Veal was a maiden gentlewoman of about
thirty years of age, and for some years last past had been
troubled with fits; which were perceived coming on her, by her
going off from her discourse very abruptly to some impertinence.
She was maintained by an only brother, and kept his house in
Dover. She was a very pious woman, and her brother a very sober
man to all appearance; but now he does all he can to null or
quash the story. Mrs. Veal was intimately acquainted with Mrs.
Bargrave from her childhood. Mrs. Veal's circumstances were then
mean; her father did not take care of his children as he ought,
so that they were exposed to hardships; and Mrs. Bargrave, in
those days, had as unkind a father, though she wanted neither for
food nor clothing, whilst Mrs. Veal wanted for both; insomuch
that she would often say, Mrs. Bargrave, you are not only the
best, but the only friend I have in the world, and no
circumstance of life shall ever dissolve my friendship. They
would often condole each other's adverse fortunes, and read
together Drelincourt upon Death, and other good books; and so,
like two Christian friends, they comforted each other under their
sorrow.<p>

Some time after, Mr. Veal's friends got him a place in the
custom-house at Dover, which occasioned Mrs. Veal, by little and
little, to fall off from her intimacy with Mrs. Bargrave, though
there was never any such thing as a quarrel; but an indifference
came on by degrees, till at last Mrs. Bargrave had not seen her
in two years and a half; though above a twelvemonth of the time
Mrs. Bargrave hath been absent from Dover, and this last half
year has been in Canterbury about two months of the time,
dwelling in a house of her own.<p>

In this house, on the 8th of September, 1705, she was sitting
alone in the forenoon, thinking over her unfortunate life, and
arguing herself into a due resignation to providence, though her
condition seemed hard.  And, said she, I have been provided for
hitherto, and doubt not but I shall be still; and am well
satisfied that my afflictions shall end when it is most fit for
me: and then took up her sewing-work, which she had no sooner
done, but she hears a knocking at the door. She went to see who
was there, and this proved to be Mrs. Veal, her old friend, who
was in a riding-habit. At that moment of time the clock struck
twelve at noon.<p>

Madam, says Mrs. Bargrave, I am surprised to see you, you have
been so long a stranger; but told her, she was glad to see her,
and offered to salute her; which Mrs. Veal complied with, till
their lips almost touched; and then Mrs. Veal drew her hand
across her own eyes, and said, I am not very well, and so waived
it. She told Mrs. Bargrave, she was going a journey, and had a
great mind to see her first. But, says Mrs. Bargrave, how came
you to take a journey alone? I am amazed at it, because I know
you have a fond brother. Oh! says Mrs. Veal, I gave my brother
the slip, and came away because I had so great a desire to see
you before I took my journey. So Mrs. Bargrave went in with her,
into another room within the first, and Mrs. Veal sat her down in
an elbow-chair, in which Mrs. Bargrave was sitting when she heard
Mrs. Veal knock. Then says Mrs. Veal, My dear friend, I am come
to renew our old friendship again, and beg your pardon for my
breach of it; and if you can forgive me, you are the best of
women. O, says Mrs. Bargrave, do not mention such a thing; I have
not had an uneasy thought about it; I can easily forgive it. What
did you think of me? said Mrs. Veal. Says Mrs. Bargrave, I
thought you were like the rest of the world, and that prosperity
had made you forget yourself and me. Then Mrs. Veal reminded Mrs.
Bargrave of the many friendly offices she did her in former days,
and much of the conversation they had with each other in the
times of their adversity; what books they read, and what comfort,
in particular, they received from Drelincourt's Book of Death,
which was the best, she said, on that subject ever written. She
also mentioned Dr. Sherlock, the two Dutch books which were
translated, written upon death, and several others. But
Drelincourt, she said, had the clearest notions of death, and of
the future state, of any who had handled that subject. Then she
asked Mrs. Bargrave, whether she had Drelincourt. She said, Yes.
Says Mrs. Veal, Fetch it. And so Mrs. Bargrave goes up stairs and
brings it down. Says Mrs. Veal, Dear Mrs. Bargrave, if the eyes
of our faith were as open as the eyes of our body, we should see
numbers of angels about us for our guard. The notions we have of
heaven now, are nothing like what it is, as Drelincourt says;
therefore be comforted under your afflictions, and believe that
the Almighty has a particular regard to you; and that your
afflictions are marks of God's favour; and when they have done
the business they are sent for, they shall be removed from you.
And, believe me, my dear friend, believe what I say to you, one
minute of future happiness will infinitely reward you for all
your sufferings. For, I can never believe, (and claps her hand
upon her knee with great earnestness, which indeed ran through
most of her discourse,) that ever God will suffer you to spend
all your days in this afflicted state; but be assured, that your
afflictions shall leave you, or you them, in a short time. She
spake in that pathetical and heavenly manner, that Mrs. Bargrave
wept several times, she was so deeply affected with it.<p>

Then Mrs. Veal mentioned Dr. Kenrick's Ascetick, at the end of
which he gives an account of the lives of the primitive
Christians. Their pattern she recommended to our imitation, and
said, their conversation was not like this of our age: For now,
says she, there is nothing but frothy, vain discourse, which is
far different from theirs. Theirs was to edification, and to
build one another up in faith; so that they were not as we are,
nor are we as they were: but, says she, we ought to do as they
did. There was an hearty friendship among them; hut where is it
now to be found? Says Mrs. Bargrave, It is hard indeed to find a
true friend in these days. Says Mrs. Veal, Mr. Norris has a fine
copy of verses, called Friendship in Perfection, which I
wonderfully admire. Have you seen the book? says Mrs. Veal. No,
says Mrs. Bargrave, but I have the verses of my own writing out.
Have you? says Mrs. Veal, then fetch them. Which she did from
above stairs, and offered them to Mrs. Veal to read, who refused,
and waived the thing, saying, holding down her head would make it
ache; and then desired Mrs. Bargrave to read them to her, which
she did. As they were admiring friendship, Mrs. Veal said, Dear
Mrs. Bargrave, I shall love you for ever. In these verses there
is twice used the word Elysian, Ah! says Mrs. Veal, these poets
have such names for heaven. She would often draw her hand across
her own eyes, and say, Mrs. Bargrave, do not you think I am
mightily impaired by my fits? No, says Mrs. Bargrave, I think you
look as well as ever I knew you. After all this discourse, which
the apparition put in much finer words than Mrs. Bargrave she
could pretend to, and as much more than she can remember, (for it
cannot be thought, that an hour and three quarters' conversation
could all be retained, though the main of it she thinks she
does,) she said to Mrs. Bargrave, she would have her write a
letter to her brother, and tell him, she would have him give
rings to such and such; and that there was a purse of gold in her
cabinet, and that she would have two broad pieces given to her
cousin Watson.<p>

Talking at this rate, Mrs. Bargrave thought that a fit was coming
upon her, and so placed herself in a chair just before her knees,
to keep her from falling to the ground, if her fits should
occasion it: for the elbow-chair, she thought, would keep her
from falling on either side. And to divert Mrs. Veal, as she
thought, took hold of her gown-sleeve several times, and
commended it. Mrs. Veal told her, it was a scowered silk, and
newly made up. But for all this, Mrs. Veal persisted in her
request, and told Mrs. Bargrave, she must not deny her: and she
would have her tell her brother all their conversation, when she
had opportunity. Dear Mrs. Veal, says Mrs. Bargrave, this seems
so impertinent, that I cannot tell how to comply with it; and
what a mortifying story will our conversation be to a young
gentleman? Why, says Mrs. Bargrave, it is much better, methinks
to do it yourself. No, says Mrs. Veal, though it seems impertinent
to you now, you will see more reason for it hereafter. Mrs.
Bargrave then, to satisfy her importunity, was going to fetch a
pen and ink; but Mrs. Veal said, Let it alone now, but do it when
I am gone; but you must be sure to do it: which was one of the
last things she enjoined her at parting; and so she promised
her.<p>

Then Mrs. Veal asked for Mrs. Bargrave's daughter; she said, she
was not at home: But if you have a mind to see her, says Mrs.
Bargrave, I'll send for her. Do, says Mrs. Veal. On which she
left her, and went to a neighbour's to see for her; and by the
time Mrs. Bargrave was returning, Mrs. Veal was got without the
door in the street, in the face of the beast-market, on a
Saturday, which is market-day, and stood ready to part, as soon
as Mrs. Bargrave came to her. She asked her, why she was in such
haste. She said she must be going, though perhaps she might not
go her journey till Monday; and told Mrs. Bargrave, she hoped she
should see her again at her cousin Watson's, before she went
whither she was going. Then she said, she would take her leave of
her, and walked from Mrs. Bargrave in her view, till a turning
interrupted the sight of her, which was three quarters after one
in the afternoon.<p>

Mrs. Veal died the 7th of September, at twelve o'clock at noon,
of her fits, and had not above four hours' senses before her
death, in which time she received the sacrament. The next day
after Mrs. Veal's appearing, being Sunday, Mrs. Bargrave was
mightily indisposed with a cold, and a sore throat, that she
could not go out that day; but on Monday morning she sent a
person to captain Watson's, to know if Mrs. Veal was there. They
wondered at Mrs. Bargrave's inquiry; and sent her word, that she
was not there, nor was expected. At this answer Mrs. Bargrave
told the maid she had certainly mistook the name, or made some
blunder. And though she was ill, she put on her hood, and went
herself to captain Watson's though she knew none of the family,
to see if Mrs. Veal was there or not. They said, they wondered at
her asking, for that she had not been in town; they were sure, if
she had, she would have been there. Says Mrs. Bargrave, I am sure
she was with me on Saturday almost two hours: They said, it was
impossible; for they must have seen her if she had. In comes
Capt. Watson, while they were in dispute, and said, that Mrs.
Veal was certainly dead, and her escutcheons were making. This
strangely surprised Mrs. Bargrave, when she sent to the person
immediately who had the care of them, and found it true. Then she
related the whole story to captain Watson's family, and what gown
she had on, and how striped; and that Mrs. Veal told her, it was
scowered. Then Mrs. Watson cried out, You have seen her indeed,
for none knew, but Mrs. Veal and myself, that the gown was
scowered. And Mrs. Watson owned, that she described the gown
exactly: For, said she, I helped her to make it up. This Mrs.
Watson blazed all about the town, and avouched the demonstration
of the truth of Mrs. Bargrave's seeing Mrs. Veal's apparition.
And captain Watson carried two gentlemen immediately to Mrs.
Bargrave's house, to hear the relation of her own mouth. And when
it spread so fast, that gentlemen and persons of quality, the
judicious and sceptical part of the world, flocked in upon her,
it at last became such a task, that she was forced to go out of
the way. For they were, in general, extremely satisfied of the
truth of the thing, and plainly saw that Mrs. Bargrave was no
hypocondriac; for she always appears with such a cheerful air,
and pleasing mien, that she has gained the favour and esteem of
all the gentry; and it is thought a great favour, if they can but
get the relation from her own mouth. I should have told you
before, that Mrs. Veal told Mrs. Bargrave, that her sister and
brother-in-law were just come down from London to see her. Says
Mrs. Bargrave, How came you to order matters so strangely? It
could not be helped, says Mrs. Veal. And her brother and sister
did come to see her, and entered the town of Dover just as Mrs.
Veal was expiring. Mrs. Bargrave, asked her, whether she would
drink some tea. Says Mrs. Veal, I do not care if I do; but I'll
warrant you, this mad fellow, (meaning Mrs. Bargrave's husband,)
has broke all your trinkets. But, says Mrs. Bargrave, I'll get
something to drink in for all that; but Mrs. Veal waived it, and
said, It is no matter, let it alone; and so it passed.<p>

All the time I sat with Mrs. Bargrave, which was some hours, she
recollected fresh sayings of Mrs. Veal. And one material thing
more she told Mrs. Bargrave, that old Mr. Breton allowed Mrs.
Veal ten pounds a year; which was a secret, and unknown to Mrs.
Bargrave, till Mrs. Veal told it her.<p>

Mrs. Bargrave never varies in her story; which puzzles those who
doubt of the truth, or are unwilling to believe it. A servant in
the neighbour's yard, adjoining to Mrs. Bargrave's house, heard
her talking to somebody an hour of the time Mrs. Veal was with
her. Airs. Bargrave went out to her next neighbour's the very
moment she parted with Mrs. Veal, and told her what ravishing
conversation she had with an old friend, and told the whole of
it. Drelincourt's Book of Death is, since this happened, bought
up strangely. And it is to be observed, that notwithstanding all
the trouble and fatigue Mrs. Bargrave has undergone upon this
account, she never took the value of a farthing, nor suffered her
daughter to take anything of anybody, and therefore can have no
interest in telling the story.<p>

But Mr. Veal does what he can to stifle the matter, and said, he
would see Mrs. Bargrave; but yet it is certain matter of fact
that he has been at captain Watson's since the death of his
sister, and yet never went near Mrs. Bargrave; and some of his
friends report her to be a liar, and that she knew of Mr.
Breton's ten pounds a year. But the person who pretends to say
so, has the reputation of a notorious liar, among persons whom I
know to be of undoubted credit. Now Mr. Veal is more of a
gentleman than to say she lies; but says, a bad husband has
crazed her. But she needs only present herself, and it will
effectually confute that pretense. Mr. Veal says, he asked his
sister on her death-bed, whether she had a mind to dispose of
anything? And she said, No. Now, the things which Mrs. Veal's
apparition would have disposed of, were so trifling, and nothing
of justice aimed at in their disposal, that the design of it
appears to me to be only in order to make Mrs. Bargrave so to
demonstrate the truth of her appearance, as to satisfy the world
of the reality thereof, as to what she had seen and heard; and to
secure her reputation among the reasonable and understanding part
of mankind. And then again, Mr. Veal owns, that there was a purse
of gold; but it was not found in her cabinet, but in a comb-box.
This looks improbable; for that Mrs. Watson owned, that Mrs. Veal
was so very careful of the key of the cabinet, that she would
trust nobody with it. And if so, no doubt she would not trust her
gold out of it. And Mrs. Veal's often drawing her hand over her
eyes, and asking Mrs. Bargrave whether her fits had not impaired
her, looks to me as if she did it on purpose to remind Mrs.
Bargrave of her fits, to prepare her not to think it strange that
she should put her upon writing to her brother to dispose of
rings and gold, which looked so much like a dying person's
request; and it took accordingly with Mrs. Bargrave, as the
effects of her fits coming upon her; and was one of the many
instances of her wonderful love to her, and care of her, that she
should not be affrighted; which indeed appears in her whole
management, particularly in her coming to her in the day-time,
waiving the salutation, and when she was alone; and then the
manner of her parting, to prevent a second attempt to salute
her.<p>

Now, why Mr. Veal should think this relation a reflection, as it
is plain he does, by his endeavouring to stifle it, I cannot
imagine; because the generality believe her to be a good spirit,
her discourse was so heavenly. Her two great errands were to
comfort Mrs. Bargrave in her affliction, and to ask her
forgiveness for the breach of friendship, and with a pious
discourse to encourage her. So that, after all, to suppose that
Mrs. Bargrave could hatch such an invention as this from Friday
noon till Saturday noon, supposing that she knew of Mrs. Veal's
death the very first moment, without jumbling circumstances, and
without any interest too; she must be more witty, fortunate, and
wicked too, than any indifferent person, I dare say, will allow.
I asked Mrs. Bargrave several times, if she was sure she felt the
gown? She answered modestly, If my senses be to be relied on, I
am sure of it. I asked her, if she heard a sound when she clapped
her hand upon her knee? She said, she did not remember she did;
but said she appeared to be as much a substance as I did, who
talked with her. And I may, said she, be as soon persuaded, that
your apparition is talking to me now, as that I did not really
see her: for I was under no manner of fear, and received her as a
friend, and parted with her as such. I would not, says she, give
one farthing to make any one believe it: I have no interest in
it; nothing but trouble is entailed upon me for a long time, for
aught I know; and had it not come to light by accident, it would
never have been made public. But now, she says, she will make her
own private use of it, and keep herself out of the way as much as
she can; and so she has done since. She says, She had a gentleman
who came thirty miles to her to hear the relation; and that she
had told it to a room full of people at a time. Several
particular gentlemen have had the story from Mrs. Bargrave's own
mouth.<p>

This thing has very much affected me. and I am as well satisfied,
as I am of the best-grounded matter of fact. And why we should
dispute matter of fact, because we cannot solve things of which
we can have no certain or demonstrative notions, seems strange to
me. Mrs. Bargrave's authority and sincerity alone, would have
been undoubted in any other case.

</body>

</html>
