<title>Irving Howe on Ralph Ellison, 1952</title>
<BODY bgcolor=FFFFFF text=000000 link=FF0000 vlink=0000FF>

<h2>review of: Ralph Ellison's <i>Invisible Man</i></h2>
<h3>by Irving <a href=wald-on-howe.html>Howe</a></h3>
<b>published in <i>The Nation</i> May 10, 1952</b>
<p>
<li><a href=ellison-main.html>Links to Ellison material</a>
<p>
     This novel is a soaring and exalted record of a Negro's
journey through contemporary America in search of success,
companionship, and, finally, himself; like all our fictions
devoted to the idea of experience, it moves from province to
city, from naive faith to disenchantment; and despite its
structural incoherence and occasional pretentiousness of manner,
it is one of the few remarkable first novels we have had in some
years.
<p>

     The beginning is nightmare.  A Negro boy, timid and
compliant, comes to a white smoker in a Southern town:  he is to
be awarded a scholarship.  Together with several other Negroes he
is rushed to the front of the ballroom, where a sumptuous blonde
tantalizes and frightens them by dancing in the nude. 
Blindfolded, the Negro boys stage a "battle royal," a
free-for-all in which they pummel each other to the drunken
shouts of the whites.  "Practical jokes," humiliations,
terrors--and then the boy delivers a prepared speech of gratitude
to his white benefactors.
<p>
     Nothing, fortunately, in the rest of the novel is quite so
harrowing.  The unnamed hero goes to his Southern college and is
expelled for having innocently taken a white donor through a
Negro gin-mill; he then leaves for New York, where he works in a
factory, becomes a soapboxer for the Harlem Communists, a big
wheel in the Negro world, and the darling of the Stalinist
bohemia;  and finally, in some not quite specified way, he finds
himself after witnessing a frenzied riot in Harlem.

<p>  Though immensely gifted, Ellison is not a finished
craftsman.  The tempo of his book is too feverish, and at times
almost hysterical.  Too often he tries to overwhelm the reader; 
but when he should be doing something other then overwhelm, when
he should be persuading or suggesting or simply telling, he
forces and tears.
<p>
     Because the book is written in the first person singular,
Ellison cannot establish ironic distance between his hero and
himself, or between the matured "I" telling the story and the "I"
who is its victim.  And because the experience is so apocalyptic
and magnified, it absorbs and then dissolves the hero;  every
minor character comes through brilliantly, but the seeing "I" is
seldom seen.
<p>
     The middle section of novel concerns the Harlem Stalinists,
and it is the only one that strikes me as not quite true. 
Writing with evident bitterness, Ellison makes his Stalinists so
stupid and vicious that one cannot understand how they could have
attracted him.  I am ready to believe that the Communist Party
manipulates its members with conscious cynicism, but I am quite
certain that this cynicism is both more guarded and more complex
than Ellison assumes;  surely no Stalinist leader would tell a
prominent Negro member, "You were not hired to think" -- even if
that were what he secretly felt.  The trouble with such
caricature is that it undermines the intention behind it, making
the Stalinists seem not the danger they are but mere clowns.
<p>
     Equally disturbing is Ellison's apparent wish to be
intellectually up-to-date.  As his hero quits the Communist
Party, he wonders:  "Could politics ever be an expression of
love?"  This portentous and perhaps meaningless question,
whatever its place in a little magazine, is surely inappropriate
to a  character who has been presented mainly as a passive victim
of experience.  Not am I persuaded by the hero's final discovery
that "my world has become one of infinite possibilities," his
refusal to be the invisible man whose body is manipulated by
various social groups.  Though the unqualified assertion of
individuality is at the moment a favorite notion of literary
people, it is also a vapid one, for the unfortunate fact remains
that to define one's individuality is to stumble over social
fences that do not allow one "infinite possibilities."  It is
hardly an accident that Ellison's hero does not even attempt to
specify those possibilities.
<p>
     These faults mar <i>Invisible Man</i> but do not destroy it. 
For Ellison has an abundance of that primary talent without which
neither craft nor intelligence can save a novelist;  he is
richly, wildly inventive;  his scenes rise and dip with tension,
his people bleed, his language stings.  No other writer has
captured so much of the confusion and agony, the hidden gloom and
surface gaiety of Negro life.  His ear for Negro speech is
magnificent:  a share-cropper calmly describing how he seduced
his own daughter, a Harlem street-vender spinning jive, a West
Indian woman inciting her men to resist an eviction.  The rhythm
of the prose is harsh and tensed, like a beat of harried
alertness.  The observation is expert:  Ellison knows exactly how
zoot-suiters walk, making stylization their principle of life,
and exactly how the antagonism between American and West Indian
Negroes works itself out in speech and humor.  For all his
self-involvement, he is capable of extending himself toward his
people, of accepting them as they are, in their blindness and
hope.  And in his final scene he has created and unforgettable
image:  "Ras the Destroyer," a Negro nationalist, appears on a
horse, dressed in the costume of an Abyssinian chieftain,
carrying spear and shield, and charging wildly into the police --
a black Quixote, mad, absurd, yet unbearably pathetic.
<p>
     Some reviewers, from the best of intentions, have assured
their readers that this is a good novel and not merely a good
Negro novel.  But of course <i>Invisible Man</i> is a Negro novel
-- what white man could ever have written it?  It is drenched in
Negro life, talk, music:  it tells us how distant even the best
of the whites are from the black men that pass them on the
streets;  and it is written from a particular compound of
emotions that no white man could possibly simulate.  To deny that
this is a Negro novel is to deprive the Negroes of their one
basic right:  the right to cry out their difference.



<!--blah--> <p> <hr> <center><b>
<!-- Google CSE Search Box Begins  -->
  <form id="searchbox_002685536534722764548:dtbbvc0eg1g" action="http://www.google.com/cse">
    <input type="hidden" name="cx" value="002685536534722764548:dtbbvc0eg1g" />
    <input type="hidden" name="cof" value="FORID:0" />
    <input name="q" type="text" size="40" />
    <input type="submit" name="sa" value="Search" />
  </form>
  <script type="text/javascript" src="http://www.google.com/coop/cse/brand?form=searchbox_002685536534722764548%3Adtbbvc0eg1g"></script>
<!-- Google CSE Search Box Ends -->
 <a href=home.html>50s HOME</a> | <a
href=readinglist.html>READING LIST</a> | <a href=hot.html>NEWS</A> | <A
HREF=../home.html>FILREIS HOME</a></b> </center> <hr><p> Document URL:
http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/50s/howe-on-ellison.html<br> Last
modified: Thursday, 31-May-2007 09:42:21 EDT

