<html>

<head>

<title>Johnson's Life of Ascham</title>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="texts.css">

</head>

<body>

<h1 align="center">The Life of Ascham</h1>

<h2 align="center">By <a href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Johnson/">Samuel Johnson</a></h2>

<h3 align="center">Edited by <a
href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/">Jack Lynch</a></h3>

The text is scanned from Johnson's 1825 Oxford <em>Works</em>.  
Small capitals appear here as regular capitals.  Please send
suggestions and corrections to <a
href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/contact.html">Jack
Lynch</a>.

<hr>

IT often happens to writers, that they are known only by their
works; the incidents of a literary life are seldom observed, and,
therefore, seldom recounted: but Ascham has escaped the common fate
by the friendship of Edward Graunt, the learned master of
Westminster school, who devoted an oration to his memory, and has
marked the various vicissitudes of his fortune. Graunt either
avoided the labour of minute inquiry, or thought domestick
occurrences unworthy of his notice; or, preferring the character of
an orator to that of an historian, selected only such particulars
as he could best express or most happily embellish. His narrative
is, therefore, scanty, and I know not by what materials it can now
be amplified.<p>

Roger Ascham was born in the year 1515, at Kirby Wiske, (or Kirby
Wicke,) a village near Northallerton, in Yorkshire, of a family
above the vulgar. His father, John Ascham, was house-steward in the
family of Scroop; and, in that age, when the different orders of
men were at a greater distance from each other, and the manners of
gentlemen were regularly formed by menial services in great houses,
lived with a very conspicuous reputation. Margaret Ascham, his
wife, is said to have been allied to many considerable families,
but her maiden name is not recorded. She had three sons, of whom
Roger was the youngest, and some daughters; but who can hope, that
of any progeny more than one shall deserve to be mentioned? They
lived married sixty-seven years, and, at last, died together almost
on the same hour of the same day.<p>

Roger, having passed his first years under the care of his parents,
was adopted into the family of Antony Wingfield, who maintained
him, and committed his education, with that of his own sons, to the
care of one Bond, a domestick tutor. He very early discovered an
unusual fondness for literature by an eager perusal of English
books; and, having passed happily through the scholastick
rudiments, was put, in 1530, by his patron Wingfield, to St. John's
college in Cambridge.<p>

Ascham entered Cambridge at a time when the last great revolution
of the intellectual world was filling every academical mind with
ardour or anxiety. The destruction of the Constantinopolitan empire
had driven the Greeks, with their language, into the interiour
parts of Europe, the art of printing had made the books easily
attainable, and Greek now began to be taught in England. The
doctrines of Luther had already filled all the nations of the
Romish communion with controversy and dissension. New studies of
literature, and new tenets of religion, found employment for all
who were desirous of truth, or ambitious of fame. Learning was, at
that time, prosecuted with that eagerness and perseverance, which,
in this age of indifference and dissipation, it is not easy to
conceive. To teach or to learn, was, at once, the business and the
pleasure of the academical life; and an emulation of study was
raised by Cheke and Smith, to which even the present age, perhaps,
owes many advantages, without remembering, or knowing, its
benefactors.<p>

Ascham soon resolved to unite himself to those who were enlarging
the bounds of knowledge, and, immediately upon his admission into
the college, applied himself to the study of Greek. Those who were
zealous for the new learning, were often no great friends to the
old religion; and Ascham, as he became a Grecian, became a
protestant. The reformation was not yet begun; disaffection to
popery was considered as a crime justly punished by exclusion from
favour and preferment, and was not yet openly professed, though
superstition was gradually losing its hold upon the publick. The
study of Greek was reputable enough, and Ascham pursued it with
diligence and success, equally conspicuous. He thought a language
might be most easily learned by teaching it; and, when he had
obtained some proficiency in Greek, read lectures, while he was yet
a boy, to other boys, who were desirous of instruction. His
industry was much encouraged by Pember, a man of great eminence at
that time, though I know not that he has left any monuments behind
him, but what the gratitude of his friends and scholars has
bestowed. He was one of the great encouragers of Greek learning,
and particularly applauded Ascham's lectures, assuring him in a
letter, of which Graunt has preserved an extract, that he would
gain more knowledge by explaining one of &AElig;sop's fables to a
boy, than by hearing one of Homer's poems explained by another.<p>

Ascham took his bachelor's degree in 1534, February 18, in the
eighteenth year of his age; a time of life at which it is more
common now to enter the universities, than to take degrees, but
which, according to the modes of education then in use, had nothing
of remarkable prematurity. On the 23rd of March following, he was
chosen fellow of the college, which election he considered as a
second birth. Dr. Metcalf, the master of the college, a man, as
Ascham tells us, "meanly learned himself, but no mean encourager of
learning in others," clandestinely promoted his election, though he
openly seemed first to oppose it, and afterwards to censure it,
because Ascham was known to favour the new opinions; and the master
himself was accused of giving an unjust preference to the northern
men, one of the factions into which this nation was divided, before
we could find any more important reason of dissension, than that
some were born on the northern, and some on the southern side of
Trent. Any cause is sufficient for a quarrel; and the zealots of
the north and south lived long in such animosity, that it was
thought necessary at Oxford to keep them quiet, by choosing one
proctor every year from each.<p>

He seems to have been, hitherto, supported by the bounty of
Wingfield, which his attainment of a fellowship now freed him from
the necessity of receiving. Dependance, though in those days it was
more common and less irksome, than in the present state of things,
can never have been free from discontent; and, therefore, he that
was released from it must always have rejoiced. The danger is, lest
the joy of escaping from the patron may not leave sufficient memory
of the benefactor. Of this forgetfulness, Ascham cannot be accused;
for he is recorded to have preserved the most grateful and
affectionate reverence for Wingfield, and to have never grown weary
of recounting his benefits.<p>

His reputation still increased, and many resorted to his chamber to
hear the Greek writers explained. He was, likewise, eminent for
other accomplishments. By the advice of Pember, he had learned to
play on musical instruments, and he was one of the few who excelled
in the mechanical art of writing, which then began to be cultivated
among us, and in which we now surpass all other nations. He not
only wrote his pages with neatness, but embellished them with
elegant draughts and illuminations; an art at that time so highly
valued, that it contributed much both to his fame and his
fortune.<p>

He became master of arts in March, 1537, in his twenty-first year,
and then, if not before, commenced tutor, and publickly undertook
the education of young men. A tutor of one-and-twenty, however
accomplished with learning, however exalted by genius, would now
gain little reverence or obedience; but in those days of discipline
and regularity, the authority of the statutes easily supplied that
of the teacher; all power that was lawful was reverenced. Besides,
young tutors had still younger pupils.<p>

Ascham is said to have courted his scholars to study by every
incitement, to have treated them with great kindness, and to have
taken care, at once, to instil learning and piety, to enlighten
their minds, and to form their manners. Many of his scholars rose
to great eminence; and among them William Grindal was so much
distinguished, that, by Cheke's recommendation, he was called to
court, as a proper master of languages for the lady Elizabeth.<p>

There was yet no established lecturer of Greek; the university,
therefore, appointed Ascham to read in the open schools, and paid
him out of the publick purse an honorary stipend, such as was then
reckoned sufficiently liberal. A lecture was afterwards founded by
king Henry, and he then quitted the schools, but continued to
explain Greek authors in his own college.<p>

He was at first an opponent of the new pronunciation introduced, or
rather of the ancient restored, about this time, by Cheke and
Smith, and made some cautious struggles for the common practice,
which the credit and dignity of his antagonists did not permit him
to defend very publickly, or with much vehemence: nor were they
long his antagonists; for either his affection for their merit, or
his conviction of the cogency of their arguments, soon changed his
opinion and his practice, and he adhered ever after to their method
of utterance.<p>

Of this controversy it is not necessary to give a circumstantial
account; something of it may be found in Strype's Life of Smith,
and something in Baker's Reflections upon Learning; it is
sufficient to remark here, that Cheke's pronunciation was that
which now prevails in the schools of England. Disquisitions not
only verbal, but merely literal, are too minute for popular
narration.<p>

He was not less eminent, as a writer of Latin, than as a teacher of
Greek. All the publick letters of the university were of his
composition; and, as little qualifications must often bring great
abilities into notice, he was recommended to this honourable
employment, not less by the neatness of his hand, than the elegance
of his style.<p>

However great was his learning, he was not always immured in his
chamber; but, being valetudinary, and weak of body, thought it
necessary to spend many hours in such exercises as might best
relieve him after the fatigue of study. His favourite amusement was
archery, in which he spent, or, in the opinion of others, lost so
much time, that those whom either his faults or virtues made his
enemies, and, perhaps, some whose kindness wished him always
worthily employed, did not scruple to censure his practice, as
unsuitable to a man professing learning, and, perhaps, of bad
example in a place of education.<p>

To free himself from this censure was one of the reasons for which
he published, in 1544, his Toxophilus, or the Schole or Partitions
of Shooting, in which he joins the praise with the precepts of
archery. He designed not only to teach the art of shooting, but to
give an example of diction more natural and more truly English than
was used by the common writers of that age, whom he censures for
mingling exotick terms with their native language, and of whom he
complains, that they were made authors, not by skill or education,
but by arrogance and temerity.<p>

He has not failed in either of his purposes. He has sufficiently
vindicated archery as an innocent, salutary, useful, and liberal
diversion; and if his precepts are of no great use, he has only
shown, by one example among many, how little the hand can derive
from the mind, how little intelligence can conduce to dexterity. In
every art, practice is much; in arts manual, practice is almost the
whole: precept can, at most, but warn against errour; it can never
bestow excellence.<p>

The bow has been so long disused, that most English readers have
forgotten its importance, though it was the weapon by which we
gained the battle of Agincourt; a weapon which, when handled by
English yeomen, no foreign troops were able to resist. We were not
only abler of body than the French, and, therefore, superiour in
the use of arms, which are forcible only in proportion to the
strength with which they are handled, but the national practice of
shooting for pleasure or for prizes, by which every man was inured
to archery from his infancy, gave us insuperable advantage, the bow
requiring more practice to skilful use than any other instrument of
offense.<p>

Firearms were then in their infancy; and though battering-pieces
had been some time in use, I know not whether any soldiers were
armed with hand-guns when the Toxophilus was first published. They
were soon after used by the Spanish troops, whom other nations made
haste to imitate; but how little they could yet effect, will be
understood from the account given by the ingenious author of the
Exercise for the Norfolk Militia.<p>

"The first muskets were very heavy, and could not be fired without
a rest; they had matchlocks, and barrels of a wide bore, that
carried a large ball and charge of powder, and did execution at a
greater distance.<p>

"The musketeers on a march carried only their rests and ammunition,
and had boys to bear their muskets after them for which they were
allowed great additional pay.<p>

"They were very slow in loading, not only by reason of the
unwieldiness of the pieces, and because they carried the powder and
balls separate, but from the time it took to prepare and adjust the
match; so that their fire was not near so brisk as ours is now.
Afterwards a lighter kind of matchlock musket came into use, and
they carried their ammunition in bandeliers, which were broad belts
that came over the shoulder, to which were hung several little
cases of wood covered with leather, each containing a charge of
powder; the balls they carried loose in a pouch; and they had also
a priming-horn hanging by their side.<p>

"The old English writers call those large muskets calivers; the
harquebuss was a lighter piece, that could be fired without a rest.
The matchlock was fired by a match fixed by a kind of tongs in the
serpentine or cock, which, by pulling the trigger, was brought down
with great quickness upon the priming in the pan, over which there
was a sliding cover, which was drawn back by the hand just at the
time of firing. There was a great deal of nicety and care required
to fit the match properly to the cock, so as to come down exactly
true on the priming, to blow the ashes from the coal, and to guard
the pan from the sparks that fell from it. A great deal of time was
also lost in taking it out of the cock, and returning it between
the fingers of the left hand every time that the piece was fired;
and wet weather often rendered the matches useless."<p>

While this was the state of firearms, and this state continued
among us to the civil war, with very little improvement, it is no
wonder that the long-bow was preferred by sir Thomas Smith, who
wrote of the choice of weapons in the reign of queen Elizabeth,
when the use of the bow still continued, though the musket was
gradually prevailing. Sir John Haward, a writer yet later, has, in
his History of the Norman Kings, endeavoured to evince the
superiority of the archer to the musketeer: however, in the long
peace of king James, the bow was wholly forgotten. Guns have from
that time been the weapons of the English, as of other nations,
and, as they are now improved, are certainly more efficacious.<p>

Ascham had yet another reason, if not for writing his book, at
least for presenting it to king Henry. England was not then, what
it may be now justly termed, the capital of literature; and,
therefore, those who aspired to superiour degrees of excellence,
thought it necessary to travel into other countries. The purse of
Ascham was not equal to the expense of peregrination; and,
therefore, he hoped to have it augmented by a pension. Nor was he
wholly disappointed; for the king rewarded him with a yearly
payment of ten pounds.<p>

A pension of ten pounds granted by a king of England to a man of
letters, appears, to modern readers, so contemptible a benefaction,
that it is not unworthy of inquiry what might be its value at that
time, and how much Ascham might be enriched by it. Nothing is more
uncertain than the estimation of wealth by denominated money; the
precious metals never retain long the same proportion to real
commodities, and the same names in different ages do not imply the
same quantity of metal; so that it is equally difficult to know how
much money was contained in any nominal sum, and to find what any
supposed quantity of gold or silver would purchase; both which are
necessary to the commensuration of money, or the adjustment of
proportion between the same sums at different periods of time.<p>

A numeral pound, in king Henry's time, contained, as now, twenty
shillings; and, therefore, it must be inquired what twenty
shillings could perform. Bread-corn is the most certain standard of
the necessaries of life. Wheat was generally sold, at that time for
one shilling, the bushel; if, therefore, we take five shillings the
bushel for the current price, ten pounds were equivalent to fifty.
But here is danger of a fallacy. It may be doubted whether wheat
was the general bread-corn of that age; and if rye, barley, or
oats, were the common food, and wheat, as I suspect, only a
delicacy, the value of wheat will not regulate the price of other
things. This doubt, however, is in favour of Ascham; for if we
raise the worth of wheat, we raise that of his pension.<p>

But the value of money has another variation, which we are still
less able to ascertain: the rules of custom, or the different needs
of artificial life, make that revenue little at one time which is
great at another. Men are rich and poor, not only in proportion to
what they have, but to what they want. In some ages, not only
necessaries are cheaper, but fewer things are necessary. In the age
of Ascham, most of the elegancies and expenses of our present
fashions were unknown: commerce had not yet distributed superfluity
through the lower classes of the people, and the character of a
student implied frugality, and required no splendour to support it.
His pension, therefore, reckoning together the wants which he could
supply, and the wants from which he was exempt, may be estimated,
in my opinion, at more than one hundred pounds a year; which, added
to the income of his fellowship, put him far enough above
distress.<p>

This was a year of good fortune to Ascham. He was chosen orator to
the university on the removal of sir John Cheke to court, where he
was made tutor to prince Edward. A man once distinguished soon
gains admirers. Ascham was now received to notice by many of the
nobility, and by great ladies, among whom it was then the fashion
to study the ancient languages. Lee, archbishop of York, allowed
him a yearly pension; how much we are not told. He was, probably,
about this time, employed in teaching many illustrious persons to
write a fine hand; and, among others, Henry and Charles, dukes of
Suffolk, the princess Elizabeth, and prince Edward.<p>

Henry the eighth died two years after, and a reformation of
religion being now openly prosecuted by king Edward and his
council, Ascham, who was known to favour it, had a new grant of his
pension, and continued at Cambridge, where he lived in great
familiarity with Bucer, who had been called from Germany to the
professorship of divinity.  But his retirement was soon at an end;
for, in 1548, his pupil Grindal, the master of the princess
Elizabeth, died, and the princess, who had already some
acquaintance with Ascham, called him from his college to direct her
studies.  He obeyed the summons, as we may easily believe, with
readiness, and, for two years, instructed her with great diligence;
but then, being disgusted either at her, or her domesticks, perhaps
eager for another change of life, he left her, without her consent,
and returned to the university. Of this precipitation he long
repented; and, as those who are not accustomed to disrespect cannot
easily forgive it, he probably felt the effects of his imprudence
to his death.<p>

After having visited Cambridge, he took a journey into Yorkshire,
to see his native place, and his old acquaintance, and there
received a letter from the court, informing him, that he was
appointed secretary to sir Richard Morisine, who was to be
despatched as ambassadour into Germany. In his return to London he
paid that memorable visit to lady Jane Gray, in which he found her
reading the Ph&aelig;do in Greek, as he has related in his
Schoolmaster.<p>

In September, 1550, he attended Morisine to Germany, and wandered
over great part of the country, making observations upon all that
appeared worthy of his curiosity, and contracting acquaintance with
men of learning. To his correspondent, Sturmius, he paid a visit,
but Sturmius was not at home, and those two illustrious friends
never saw each other. During the course of this embassy, Ascham
undertook to improve Morisine in Greek, and, for four days in the
week, explained some passages in Herodotus every morning, and more
than two hundred verses of Sophocles, or Euripides, every
afternoon. He read with him, likewise, some of the orations of
Demosthenes. On the other days he compiled the letters of business,
and in the night filled up his diary, digested his remarks, and
wrote private letters to his friends in England, and particularly
to those of his college, whom he continually exhorted to
perseverance in study. Amidst all the pleasures of novelty which
his travels supplied, and in the dignity of his publick station, he
preferred the tranquillity of private study, and the quiet of
academical retirement. The reasonableness of this choice has been
always disputed; and in the contrariety of human interests and
dispositions, the controversy will not easily be decided.<p>

He made a short excursion into Italy, and mentions in his
Schoolmaster, with great severity, the vices of Venice. He was
desirous of visiting Trent, while the council were sitting; but the
scantiness of his purse defeated his curiosity.<p>

In this journey he wrote his Report and Discourse of the Affairs in
Germany, in which be describes the dispositions and interests of
the German princes, like a man inquisitive and judicious, and
recounts many particularities, which are lost in the mass of
general history, in a style, which, to the ears of that age, was
undoubtedly mellifluous, and which is now a very valuable specimen
of genuine English.<p>

By the death of king Edward, in 1553, the reformation was stopped,
Morisine was recalled, and Ascham's pension and hopes were at an
end. He, therefore, retired to his fellowship in a state of
disappointment and despair, which his biographer has endeavoured to
express in the deepest strain of plaintive declamation. "He was
deprived of all his support," says Graunt, "stripped of his
pensions and cut off from the assistance of his friends, who had
now lost their influence: so that he had nec pr&aelig;mia nec
pr&aelig;dia, neither pension nor estate to support him at
Cambridge." There is no credit due to a rhetorician's account
either of good or evil. The truth is, that Ascham still had, in his
fellowship, all that in the early part of his life had given him
plenty, and might have lived like the other inhabitants of the
college, with the advantage of more knowledge and higher
reputation. But, notwithstanding his love of academical retirement,
he had now too long enjoyed the pleasures and festivities of
publick life, to return with a good will to academical poverty.<p>

He had, however, better fortune than he expected; and, if he
lamented his condition, like his historian, better than he
deserved. He had, during his absence in Germany, been appointed
Latin secretary to king Edward; and, by the interest of Gardiner,
bishop of Winchester, he was instated in the same office under
Philip and Mary, with a salary of twenty pounds a year.<p>

Soon after his admission to his new employment, he gave an
extraordinary specimen of his abilities and diligence, by composing
and transcribing, with his usual elegance, in three days,
forty-seven letters to princes and personages, of whom cardinals
were the lowest.<p>

How Ascham, who was known to be a protestant, could preserve the
favour of Gardiner, and hold a place of honour and profit in queen
Mary's court, it must be very natural to inquire. Cheke, as is well
known, was compelled to a recantation; and why Ascham was spared,
cannot now be discovered. Graunt, at a time when the transactions
of queen Mary's reign must have been well enough remembered,
declares, that Ascham always made open profession of the reformed
religion, and that Englesfield and others often endeavoured to
incite Gardiner against him, but found their accusations rejected
with contempt: yet he allows, that suspicions and charges of
temporization and compliance, had somewhat sullied his reputation.
The author of the Biographia Britannica conjectures, that he owed
his safety to his innocence and usefulness; that it would have been
unpopular to attack a man so little liable to censure, and that the
loss of his pen could not have been easily supplied. But the truth
is, that morality was never suffered, in the days of persecution,
to protect heresy: nor are we sure that Ascham was more clear from
common failings than those who suffered more; and, whatever might
be his abilities, they were not so necessary, but Gardiner could
have easily filled his place with another secretary. Nothing is
more vain, than, at a distant time, to examine the motives of
discrimination and partiality; for the inquirer, having considered
interest and policy, is obliged, at last, to admit more frequent
and more active motives of human conduct, caprice, accident, and
private affections.<p>

At that time, if some were punished, many were forborne; and of
many why should not Ascham happen to be one? He seems to have been
calm and prudent, and content with that peace which he was suffered
to enjoy: a mode of behaviour that seldom fails to produce
security. He had been abroad in the last years of king Edward, and
had, at least, given no recent offense. He was certainly, according
to his own opinion, not much in danger; for in the next year he
resigned his fellowship, which, by Gardiner's favour, he had
continued to hold, though not resident; and married Margaret Howe,
a young gentlewoman of a good family.<p>

He was distinguished in this reign by the notice of cardinal Pole,
a man of great candour, learning, and gentleness of manners, and
particularly eminent for his skill in Latin, who thought highly of
Ascham's style; of which it is no inconsiderable proof, that when
Pole was desirous of communicating a speech made by himself as
legate, in parliament, to the pope, he employed Ascham to translate
it.<p>

He is said to have been not only protected by the officers of
state, but favoured and countenanced by the queen herself, so that
he had no reason of complaint in that reign of turbulence and
persecution: nor was his fortune much mended, when, in 1558, his
pupil, Elizabeth, mounted the throne. He was continued in his
former employment, with the same stipend; but though he was daily
admitted to the presence of the queen, assisted her private
studies, and partook of her diversions; sometimes read to her in
the learned languages, and sometimes played with her at draughts
and chess; he added nothing to his twenty pounds a year but the
prebend of Westwang, in the church of York, which was given him the
year following. His fortune was, therefore, not proportionate to
the rank which his offices and reputation gave him, or to the
favour in which he seemed to stand with his mistress. Of this
parsimonious allotment it is again a hopeless search to inquire the
reason. The queen was not naturally bountiful, and, perhaps, did
not think it necessary to distinguish, by any prodigality of
kindness, a man who had formerly deserted her, and whom she might
still suspect of serving rather for interest than affection. Graunt
exerts his rhetorical powers in praise of Ascham's
disinterestedness and contempt of money; and declares, that, though
he was often reproached by his friends with neglect of his own
interest, he never would ask any thing, and inflexibly refused all
presents which his office or imagined interest induced any to offer
him. Camden, however, imputes the narrowness of his condition to
his love of dice and cockfights: and Graunt, forgetting himself,
allows that Ascham was sometimes thrown into agonies by
disappointed expectations. It may be easily discovered, from his
Schoolmaster, that he felt his wants, though he might neglect to
supply them; and we are left to suspect, that he showed his
contempt of money only by losing at play. If this was his practice,
we may excuse Elizabeth, who knew the domestick character of her
servants, if she did not give much to him who was lavish of a
little.<p>

However he might fail in his economy, it were indecent to treat
with wanton levity the memory of a man who shared his frailties
with all, but whose learning or virtues few can attain, and by
whose excellencies many may be improved, while himself only
suffered by his faults.<p>

In the reign of Elizabeth, nothing remarkable is known to have
befallen him, except that, in 1563, he was invited, by sir Edward
Sackville, to write the Schoolmaster, a treatise on education, upon
an occasion which he relates in the beginning of the book.<p>

This work, though begun with alacrity, in hopes of a considerable
reward, was interrupted by the death of the patron, and afterwards
sorrowfully and slowly finished, in the gloom of disappointment,
under the pressure of distress. But of the author's disinclination
or dejection there can be found no tokens in the work, which is
conceived with great vigour, and finished with great accuracy; and,
perhaps, contains the best advice that was ever given for the study
of languages.<p>

This treatise he completed, but did not publish; for that poverty
which, in our days, drives authors so hastily in such numbers to
the press, in the time of Ascham, I believe, debarred them from it.
The printers gave little for a copy, and, if we may believe the
tale of Raleigh's history, were not forward to print what was
offered them for nothing. Ascham's book, therefore, lay unseen in
his study, and was, at last, dedicated to lord Cecil by his
widow.<p>

Ascham never had a robust or vigorous body, and his excuse for so
many hours of diversion was his inability to endure a long
continuance of sedentary thought. In the latter part of his life he
found it necessary to forbear any intense application of the mind
from dinner to bedtime, and rose to read and write early in the
morning. He was, for some years, hectically feverish; and, though
he found some alleviation of his distemper, never obtained a
perfect recovery of his health. The immediate cause of his last
sickness was too close application to the composition of a poem,
which he purposed to present to the queen, on the day of her
accession. To finish this, he forbore to sleep at his accustomed
hours, till, in December, 1568, he fell sick of a kind of lingering
disease, which Graunt has not named, nor accurately described. The
most afflictive symptom was want of sleep, which he endeavoured to
obtain by the motion of a cradle. Growing every day weaker, he
found it vain to contend with his distemper, and prepared to die
with the resignation and piety of a true christian. He was attended
on his death-bed by Gravet, vicar of St. Sepulchre, and Dr. Nowel,
the learned dean of St. Paul's, who gave ample testimony to the
decency and devotion of his concluding life. He frequently
testified his desire of that dissolution which he soon obtained.
His funeral sermon was preached by Dr. Nowel.<p>

Roger Ascham died in the fifty-third year of his age, at a time
when, according to the general course of life, much might yet have
been expected from him, and when he might have hoped for much from
others: but his abilities and his wants were at an end together;
and who can determine, whether he was cut off from advantages, or
rescued from calamities? He appears to have been not much qualified
for the improvement of his fortune. His disposition was kind and
social; he delighted in the pleasures of conversation, and was
probably not much inclined to business. This may be suspected from
the paucity of his writings. He has left little behind him; and of
that little, nothing was published by himself but the Toxophilus,
and the account of Germany. The Schoolmaster was printed by his
widow; and the epistles were collected by Graunt, who dedicated
them to queen Elizabeth, that he might have an opportunity of
recommending his son, Giles Ascham, to her patronage. The
dedication was not lost: the young man was made, by the queen's
mandate, fellow of a college in Cambridge, where he obtained
considerable reputation. What was the effect of his widow's
dedication to Cecil, is not known: it may be hoped that Ascham's
works obtained for his family, after his decease, that support
which he did not, in his life, very plenteously procure them.<p>

Whether he was poor by his own fault, or the fault of others,
cannot now be decided; but it is certain that many have been rich
with less merit. His philological learning would have gained him
honour in any country; and, among us, it may justly call for that
reverence which all nations owe to those who first rouse them from
ignorance, and kindle among them the light of literature. Of his
manners, nothing can be said but from his own testimony, and that
of his contemporaries. Those who mention him allow him many
virtues. His courtesy, benevolence, and liberality, are celebrated;
and of his piety, we have not only the testimony of his friends,
but the evidence of his writings.<p>

That his English works have been so long neglected, is a proof of
the uncertainty of literary fame. He was scarcely known, as an
author, in his own language, till Mr. Upton published his
Schoolmaster, with learned notes. His other pieces were read only
by those few who delight in obsolete books; but as they are now
collected into one volume, with the addition of some letters never
printed before, the publick has an opportunity of recompensing the
injury, and allotting Ascham the reputation due to his knowledge
and his eloquence.

<!-- master.com.content -->

</body>

</html>
