<title>Alan Wald on Irving Howe</title>
<BODY bgcolor=FFFFFF text=000000 link=FF0000 vlink=0000FF>

from <i>The New York Intellectuals</i>, by Alan M. Wald (pp. 311-321):<p>

<center><h2>"The Cul-de-sac of Social Democracy"</h2></center><p>
<pre>
         What would happen if men remained faithful to the ideals of 
	 their youth?
         --—<i>Pietro Spina in Ignazio Silone's <b>Bread and Wine</b></i> 
</pre>
<p>

<center><h1>PORTRAIT: IRVING HOWE</h1></center> <p>

For the New York intellectuals, the consequences of Cold 
War anticommunism extend far beyond the 1950s. The 
transformation in ideology and political consciousness 
consolidated in the early 1950s definitively and perhaps 
permanently shifted the axis of anti-Stalinism from its 
revolutionary anticapitalist premise, creating a movement 
that discredited more than it assisted the far left. 
Indeed, the behavior of the bulk of the New York 
intellectuals in the 1950s undermined the validity of the 
whole anti-Stalinist current of thought and even somewhat 
redeemed the Communist, fellow-traveling, and progressive 
liberals who acted heroically by comparison. <p>

After all, in the face of the political repression -- the 
first real test for the generation that came of age in the 
1930s -- most of the anti-Stalinists not only denuded 
themselves of past radicalism but developed sophisticated 
rationalizations for tolerating the essence if not the 
precise McCarthyite form of the witch-hunt. Responsibility 
for the bulk of the resistance among intellectuals, as well 
as for antiracist and anti-imperialist political activity, 
was handed over to the Communists, fellow travelers, and 
progressive liberals. These women and men may have suffered 
persecution at the time, but they achieved near martyrdom 
in the eyes of the next generation of left-wing 
intellectuals. Ignorance on the part of 1960s New Leftists 
was not the sole reason that apologists for Stalinism such 
as Lillian Hellman, Paul Robeson, and the Hollywood Ten 
were resurrected as moral beacons; their rehabilitation was 
the logical by-product of the dismal record of all but a 
few of the founders of the intellectual anti-Stalinist 
left. <p>

Factors such as political vision and sustained membership 
in socialist organizations seem to have been more important 
than age in determining whether or not one accommodated to 
the witch-hunt and the foreign policy it was intended to 
legitimize. Moreover, the course taken by most of the 
generation of radicalized students who had come to anti-
Stalinist Marxism during the middle and the late 1930s 
parallels that of the founders. Those who held membership 
in or were closely allied with the Trotskyist movement in 
the New York and New Jersey area comprised an impressive 
range of future intellectuals: Irving Howe, literary critic 
and editor of *Dissent*; Melvin Tumin, sociologist and 
anthropologist; Lawrence Kradar, anthropologist; Martin 
Diamond, political scientist; Gertrude Himmelfarb, 
historian; I. Milton Sacks, political scientist; Morroe 
Berger, sociologist; Peter Rossi, sociologist; Seymour 
Martin Lipset, sociologist; Philip O. Selznick, 
sociologist; Leslie Fiedler, literary critic; Irving 
Kristol, journalist; and Melvin J. Lasky, editor of 
*Encounter*. Of this generation, almost none considered 
themselves as socialists of any variety after the Cold War 
began, and a fair number subsequently evolved considerably 
to the right. Among the exceptions was Irving Howe, perhaps 
the most significant and capable radical literary critic of 
our time. <p>

That Howe was able to bring an element of socialist 
discourse into American literary and academic circles 
during the Cold War years testifies to his considerable 
intellectual resources and certain strengths of character. 
That he vehemently turned against the New Left of the 1960s 
and early 1970s, caricaturing its aims and activities, and 
even flirted briefly with the incipient neoconservatives 
and their campaign against the *New York Review of Books*, 
may be evidence of the limitations of the social democratic 
perspective that he chose as his political guide. 
Hardworking, an impressive literary craftsman, a critic of 
exceptional imaginative and intellectual powers, and a 
tireless fighter for his political views, Howe's inability 
to revitalize the anti-Stalinist left as more than an 
impotent wing of liberalism is due primarily to a self-
defeating political strategy, not personal defects in 
morality or intelligence. <p>

Howe was born Irving Horenstein in 1920, the son of 
immigrants who ran a small grocery store that went out of 
business during the Great Depression. A socialist activist 
even before he entered the City College of New York, Howe 
gravitated quickly to the Trotskyist wing of the Young 
Peoples Socialist League, becoming one of its national 
leaders after it broke from the Socialist Party to become
the youth group of the Socialist Workers Party. On the City 
College campus he was a main leader of the Trotskyist 
students, full of fiery rhetoric and eager for militant 
action not so different from some of the most extreme {but 
nonterrorist) elements of the New Left of the 1960s. During 
the Spanish Civil War he would jump up on the tables in the 
alcoves to give speeches. <p>

A leaflet attacking the campus Reserve Officers Training 
Corps declared: "We must wipe it out. It is the organ of 
American imperialism in the college." The major campaign of 
the Young Peoples Socialist League (Fourth International) 
was against the reformism of the Communist students who 
were insufficiently antiwar. In an open letter published in 
the *Campus*, the City College of New York student 
newspaper, Howe's group proclaimed: "The Stalinist leaders 
of the American Student Union are striving to lead the ASU 
along the road of their own social patriotism, and to the 
abandonment of militant struggle." Shortly after, the group 
issued a leaflet warning, "Our main enemy is at home: 
American capitalism. FDR is trying to line up the working 
class for the next imperialist war -- the second edition of 
1914-18 may break out very soon." In late 1937 Howe and his 
comrades published a longer manifesto called "Red Herrings 
from the Right," charging that the Communists wanted to 
turn the American Student Union "into a Roosevelt machine" 
and insisting that the only correct program against war "is 
the struggle for the revolutionary overthrow of the 
govemment, to set up a workers' government which can really 
ensure peace." They called upon City College students to 
help "build a new International" and "to continue the 
struggle for the principles of Lenin." In 1938 they 
organized a "Strike against Imperialist War," which 
featured a rally with James Burnham and 
<a href=farrell.html>James T. Farrell</a>
and greetings from Sidney Hook. To protest cuts in 
education, the group called for mass picket lines and sit-
down strikes.  Howe himself edited a rough mimeographed 
publication called the *CCNY Red Book*, which denounced the 
university "as a striking example of the intellectual 
bankruptcy of the capitalist class." He also wrote for and 
helped edit *Challenge of Youth*, the national newspaper of 
the Young Peoples Socialist League (Fourth International). <p>

An immediate and admiring supporter of Max Shachtman during 
the 1939-40 dispute, Howe's journalistic talents were 
quickly recognized by the Workers Party leadership, and 
many saw him as Shachtman's most promising protege. A few 
months after *Labor Action* was launched, Howe became the 
paper's managing editor, a post that he held until he was 
drafted into the army. Thereafter he contributed to the 
paper under the name R. Fahan. This seems to suggest *Rot 
Fahne* (Red Flag), the name of Rosa Luxemburg's newspaper. 
But it also conveniently resembled one of his party names, 
R. Fangston, which he was dubbed by a comrade because he 
had some sharply pointed teeth that were later filed down, 
although Fangston also suggested his aggressive, polemical 
style. After his release from military service, a good part 
of which was spent reading in Alaska, he became a member of 
the editorial board under the name Irving Howe, which he 
had by now legally changed from Horenstein. <p>

Howe's articles in *Labor Action*, which touched on a 
remarkable range of subjects, were marked by stridency and 
an occasional utopianism with religious overtones. For 
example, in an article about the use of poison gas during 
the war, he declared, "There is hope in the world of chaos 
and destruction, the star of socialism shines with 
constancy and promise. Not the ceaseless war, the chaotic 
postwar disintegration, the dictatorial brutality which 
capitalism promises, but the peace, the freedom, the human 
brotherhood which socialism alone can bring. That is our 
road.'' Several years later, discussing the postwar 
situation in Europe, he declared, "If men would have a 
sense of dignity and purpose, a feeling that their lives 
are more than tribulation and suffering, they must fight 
for socialism. That is the path out of the desert.'' 
Polemicizing against the reactionary Senator Theodore Bilbo 
from Mississippi, he urged, "Let us summon our hatred of 
injustice and let us burn the filth of Bilboism off the 
skin of the land. And then let us use the plenty and rich 
of this land to build a new society of peace and equality, 
of plenty for all, of the brotherhood of all men, where the 
children of tomorrow will play in the streets and the 
fields unaware of the deforming hatreds that now poison our 
lives.'' <p>

In the late 1940s Howe devoted considerable attention to 
exposing social democratic reformism in the United States 
as well as in Europe. Especially scandalous in his view was 
the failure of the French social democrats to demand the 
immediate removal of their armed forces from Indochina, 
which stood in a sorry contrast to the position of the 
Trotskvists in France: <p>

“We have special reason to be proud of our French comrades 
-- the Fourth International of the PCI [Intemational 
Communist Partyl, who, without the slightest ambiguity, 
have come out in support of the Indo-Chinese people; who 
have demanded the complete withdrawal of French troops from 
Indo-China; and who . . . defied the Parisian police to 
demonstrate their solidarity with their Indo-Chinese 
brothers in the streets of Paris. . . . We stand squarely 
by the side of the French Fourth International. They do not 
bow down before French imperialism; they rather defy it and 
send their brothers of Indo-China this message: We are with 
you in the struggle for independence; we are your brothers; 
we shall fight beside you against the Le Clercs, the Blums, 
and the Thorez's. <p>

Howe concluded that in the behavior of the Socialist Leon 
Blum one sees "the true imperialist face of Social 
Democracy.'' In a follow-up article some months later he 
again attacked the French social democrats: "the sight of 
these pious liberals, these democratic worthies who are so 
ready to read us lectures about 'Bolshevik amorality' -- 
the sight, I say, of these liberals twisting themselves all 
over creation in the attempt to condone the French 
suppressions, is more than any socialist should be able to 
bear without anger.'' <p>

Howe also issued a lengthy criticism of an article written 
by his college classmate Daniel Bell in the late 1940s. In 
an issue of the journal *Modern Review*, Bell had proposed 
that socialists stop running independent election campaigns 
and strive to become the left wing of the Democratic Party 
on the grounds that such a policy was more "realistic." 
Howe, who in an earlier article had defined "realism" as 
"the first refuge of scoundrels," now defined it as a 
euphemism for "accepting the capitalist status quo." Howe 
asked, Can Bell be for "independent labor action" but not 
for a labor party? Bell believed socialists should work in 
the Democratic Party serving as "intellectual catalysts"; 
but to Howe this actually meant acting as "intellectual 
stooges" for the labor leaders, a "shameful" example of 
which had been already provided by Gus Tyler and Jay 
Lovestone. Such a policy, Howe insisted, would only serve 
the interests of the capitalist oppressors, who actually 
controlled the Democratic Party. In a closing paean to the 
Workers Party, Howe urged intellectuals to withstand the 
pressure to become "oppositionist liberals supporting the 
capitalist status quo" by having the "courage and wisdom" 
to struggle for "independent class action and the 
rebuilding of an independent socialist movement.'' <p>

Howe was an equally prolific contributor to *New 
International* in which he devoted much attention to the 
politics of culture. Several of his essays presented an 
ongoing critique of the *Partisan Review* for backsliding 
on the revolutionary commitments of its founding editorial 
statement. In the early 1940s Howe focused on Rahv's 
reversal of his internationalist position on World War II. 
During the late 1940s he dissected a rather astonishing 
*Partisan Review* editorial called "The Liberal Fifth 
Column," in which American liberals were berated for being 
too soft on the Soviet Union and adoption of a more 
belligerent U.S. foreign policy was urged. <p>

Howe pointed out that obsessive anti-Communism only 
obscures the question of which forces one should ally 
oneself with to wage the battle against Stalinism; it can 
"only render impossible an effective struggle against 
Stalinism -- not to mention making hopeless any sort of 
positive aim." Howe explained that by rejecting "the method 
of analysis which characterizes the basic aspects of 
American foreign policy in class terms," the *Partisan 
Review* "has succumbed to *Stalinophobia*, a disease common 
among intellectuals who were once radicals; its major 
symptom is that regular tired feeling. *Stalinophobia* 
takes the form of bitter and quite justified denunciations 
of Stalinism without any corresponding effort to develop a 
sociological understanding of it. Hatred for Stalinism 
becomes an emotional block to its political analysis." Howe 
further identified the editorial with the "vulgar articles" 
published in the right-wing social democratic *New Leader*, 
"which always lead to support of one or another reactionary 
imperialism solely because of its conjunctural opposition 
to Russia.'' <p>

Between the summer of 1945 and the fall of 1947 Howe 
engaged in a complicated debate with fellow WP members over 
the work of Arthur Koestler. It began with a critical 
review by Peter Loumos of four books by Koestler.  Neil 
Weiss, a poet and WP member, wrote a letter protesting that 
Loumos had allowed political prejudice to interfere with an 
objective assessment.  Answering Weiss's letter, Howe 
agreed that Loumos had erred in "condemning Koestler 
because the main character of *Darkness at Noon*, Rubashov, 
is portrayed as a vacillating bureaucrat who capitulates to 
Stalinism rather than as an intransigent oppositionist." 
Howe then charged that Weiss was giving too much credit to 
Koestler's political criticisms of the Second and Third 
Internationals, especially as embodied in his essays, which 
had a value of "next to none." What was exciting about 
Koestler, what made him well worth reading, was his ability 
to brilliantly "touch the heart of the modern problem" (the 
growing complexity of world politics}, "despite all those 
in the revolutionary movement whose minds still function as 
if it were 1920." Howe concluded by making a sharp 
distinction between the forms of expression in formal 
essays and in fiction. The former demanded scientific 
rigor, especially in the discussion of politics; but "the 
impressionism which I find intolerable in political 
analysis does have value in the novel or informal essay; it 
does, on a *different plane of communication*, provoke 
insights and touch sensitive areas of existence, which can 
be of subsequent help to political analysis." <p>

Eight months later there appeared a further exchange on the 
subject between Albert Glotzer, Shachtman's closest 
collaborator, and Howe. Glotzer insisted that Koestler 
should not really be judged as a novelist but as "a writer 
of fictionalized current events, or journalistic novels," 
thereby justifying Loumos's harsh critique. The meaning of 
the objection to Loumos by Weiss was therefore more serious 
than simply a "defense of literature" against vulgar 
Marxism; behind this pose, Glotzer contended that Weiss 
actually sympathized with many of Koestler's views. Thus he 
found it shocking that Howe had come to Weiss's defense. 
Apparently, in overreaction to Stalinist excesses, Howe was 
calling for a total separation of literature and politics, 
ignoring the fact that, even if literature had its 
semiautonomous sphere, the politico-social structure of 
society is what remains decisive in determining the nature 
of our lives. At the same time Glotzer pointed out that 
many of Howe's remarks on literature were themselves more 
political than literary—Howe's observation, for example, 
that "the world is no longer as simple as it was twenty-
five years ago." In fact, Glotzer protested, "the world was 
not simple twenty-five years ago!" There were complex 
problems then, and the problems of today "are the extension 
of the unsolved problems of twenty-five years ago.... *What 
Howe fails to see is the continuity of the basic social 
problem and the continuity of its solution.*" Howe's 
response was essentially that Glotzer seemed determined to 
narrowly judge literature, not by party line as did the 
Stalinists, but as if it were merely a convenient vehicle 
for political content. <p>

Other issues underlay this controversy, which expressed 
deeper problems and disagreements in the form of debates 
over literary criticism. To some extent Howe was already 
beginning to move toward his own sphere of cultural 
criticism. With publishing opportunities opening up to him 
in Elliot Cohen's new Jewish intellectual magazine, 
*Commentary*, and other journals, he naturally saw greater 
possibilities of exploration and discussion in the literary 
medium. Perhaps, too, he was reacting negatively against 
pressure from Max Shachtman to desist from a professional 
career as a writer, a career that Shachtman saw as a 
potential rival to party assignments such as the one he 
hoped that Howe would take as organizer of the Akron branch 
of the Workers Party. Moreover, since the early 1940s Howe 
had held the view that American literature must pass into a 
new phase of modernist sensibility, which resulted in a 
painful conflict with James T. Farrell, whose allegiance to 
literary realism was as ardent as was his openness to 
experimentation. <p>

Indeed, this early debate over Koestler foreshadows to some 
degree Howe's famous treatise on modemist literature, "The 
Culture of Modernism" 1970, revised version). Throughout 
the Koestler debate and in the essay Howe asserted that 
unique forms of imaginative literature create a space free 
of political ideology. He contended that one must refrain 
from judging the political content of literature -- 
especially literature of modemist sensibility -- in the 
manner in which one judges straight political doctrine. 
This is certainly an improvement over the wlgar political 
coding of literary texts that had discredited the Communist 
literary movement. Yet, as in the case of Rahv, Howe's 
appraisal was partly based on a naive, pragmatist notion of 
"ideology" as formal political doctrine -- and often only 
doctrine with which one disagreed -- whereas he depicted 
authentic literature as an ideology-free realm of 
"experience." In a 1971 debate on "Literary Criticism and 
Literary Radicals," Howe endorsed the statement of the 
Austrian Marxist Ernst Fischer that art is "the triumph of 
reality over ideology," a formulation far too ingenuous. 
Favoring a "social approach" to literary criticism but 
eschewing a social method, or any other kind of authentic 
method, neither Howe nor any of the New York intellectuals 
went beyond pragmatist simplicities to the knottier 
problems of literature and ideology. Twenty-five years 
after the Koestler debate, "The Culture of Modernism" 
presented a brilliant description of the modemist 
sensibility; but it did little more than suggest, without 
elaboration, a historical origin in romanticism, and it 
failed to address the highly relevant issue of the ideology 
of form. <p>

His burgeoning talents opened to Howe in the late 1940s the 
possibility of developing an independent life as an 
intellectual. These talents had been nurtured by the skills 
he had acquired as a journalist for the Workers Party. They 
were also honed by the intensity of the party's 
intellectual atmosphere from which he absorbed several of 
the traits that would make him distinctive as a critic: a 
remarkable polemical dexterity, reminiscent of Shachtman's 
orations; a firsthand knowledge of the international 
socialist movement; and a politico-historical consciousness 
about the social basis of cultural activity. Moreover, his 
first publishing opportunities had come through the 
assistance of more established intellectuals in the Workers 
Party milieu—Farrell, Dwight Macdonald, and Clement 
Greenberg (employed at *Commentary*). Yet at this very 
moment he began to have intense doubts about his commitment 
to the party. <p>

The bitter diatribes he then published against the 
complacency of former revolutionaries who had obtained 
secure jobs may well have been a symptom of his own inner 
turmoil. In the fall 1949 issue of *Anvil*, published by 
the New York Student Federation Against War, an 
organization that had been initiated by the Shachtman 
group, he urged students to "at least be willing to take 
chances with their lives and to commit themselves in their 
hopes and dreams," rather than "accept a living 
intellectual and moral death as the price of creature 
comfort." He further concluded that "the number of ex-
radicals who are today comfortable labor bureaucrats -- the 
kind who tell you that they too were once socialists (when 
they were young, you understand) or that they are still, in 
a sort of way, perhaps, socialists (but one must be 
practical, you understand) -- is appalling, the mark of the 
suicide of a generation of Americans." <p>

Howe's disagreements with the Workers Party do not seem to 
have surfaced until late 1946; however, by 1948 they were 
fullblown at the same time that Goldman and Farrell were 
distancing themselves. In March 1946 Howe loyally defended 
the Workers Party in a strong polemic against C. L. R. 
James, the co-leader with Raya Dunayevskaya of those within 
the party who adhered to the "state capitalist" analysis of 
the Soviet Union. At this time, the James-Dunayevskaya 
group, known as the Johnson-Forrest Tendency, was moving 
toward a rapprochement with the Socialist Workers Party on 
the grounds that the Socialist Workers Party was more 
proletarian and revolutionary than the Workers Party. Howe 
accused James's formulations of being "an insult to the 
party for which we have worked the past six years," and he 
accused the Socialist Workers Party of cowardice during 
World War II by "playing ostrich in the unions" and for its 
theory of "telescoping" the struggle for socialism and the 
struggle against fascism.  But in September of 1946 Howe 
published a review of a translation of Trotsky's *The New 
Course*, which caused considerable protest from Workers 
Party members because it raised reservations about 
Trotsky's strategy in the struggle against Stalin without 
coming to definite conclusions. When he was additionally 
attacked in the Inter
D nal Bulletin for being too "hot-headed and impatient," 
and perhaps in need of consulting a psychologist, Howe 
responded bitterly that "those of us who have spent a good 
part of the last few years in writing polemics against 
Macdonald, Burnham, the editors of *Partisan Review*, and a 
number of other opponents of revolutionary Marxism, tend to 
get a little annoyed when we are accused of anti-Marxism." <p>

In 1946 Howe had indeed launched a polemic against 
Macdonald in the pages of *Politics* magazine, which then 
employed Howe as a part-time assistant. Howe's line of 
argument was drawn from Burnham and Shachtman's 
"Intellectuals in Retreat": the "flight from Marxism of 
Macdonald and his friends" could be correlated to "the 
present period of reaction." However, these new backsliders 
persisted in deceiving themselves by constructing 
"rationalizations to withdraw from the struggle which 
continues to face humanity." Among the rationalizations 
that Howe refuted was the belief that the failure of the 
working class to transform society after World War II 
signified a permanent loss of its revolutionary potential, 
to which he replied: "The major social impulsions driving 
the working class to revolt persist; and the working 
classes of all countries do revolt. Sporadically, in 
disorganized and disoriented fashion, it is true, but they 
still revolt, even though doomed in the absence of 
revolutionary socialist leadership." Howe also claimed that 
Macdonald had caricatured Leninist party norms as 
"coercion," when, in fact, all that Leninism signified was 
"the discipline of a group1 of people who, voluntarily 
entering into certain associations from which they can just 
as freely withdraw, nonetheless believe that for a common 
purpose it is permissible to subordinate opinions on 
secondary matters in order to maintain continuous co-
operation." <p>

Yet, at the same time, Howe published an essay in 
Commentary suggesting that some of his thought was 
elsewhere. Called "The Lost Young Intellectual: A Marginal 
Man, Twice Alienated," Howe presented a largely 
autobiographical portrait of the young secular Jew 
alienated from the past but a misfit in the present. Howe 
concluded that no solution to this rootlessness existed at 
present, although someday it might be solved "if an 
American society appears in which both the Jewish 
intellectual and his people, along with everyone else, can 
find integration, security, and acceptance."  Howe could 
not be expected to call upon the readership of *Commentary* 
to join the Workers Party, but the element of despair and 
passivity that pervaded the essay suggests that a second 
self coexisted in troubled tandem with the overconfident 
Howe of the *New International, Labor Action, and 
Politics*. Four years earlier he had written an article for 
the Workers Party on the "Jewish Question" that strongly 
insisted that "there is no such thing as 'the Jew'; there 
are rich and poor Jews, Jewish workers and Jewish bosses.'' 
Both a class analysis, which Howe had so emphatically 
defended as the sine qua non of any intellectual 
discussion, and a revolutionary internationalist point of 
view, were muted, if not entirely missing, in the 
*Commentary* essay. What is most remarkable is that both 
Howes, the confident revolutionary and the twice-alienated 
marginal Jew, could present their cases with equal 
conviction, abundant evidence, and a well-crafted felicity 
of expression. <p>


<li>Howe on how <a href=howe-personalized.html>Americans personalize 
everything</a>

<li>Wald on <a href=farrell.html>James Farrell</a>. And
for an interview with Alan Wald about the <i>Radical Novel
Reconsidered</i> series, click <a
href=http://www.writing.upenn.edu/50s/wald-interview.html>here</a>.
<p>


<!--blah--> <p> <hr> <center><b>
<!-- Google CSE Search Box Begins  -->
  <form id="searchbox_002685536534722764548:dtbbvc0eg1g" action="http://www.google.com/cse">
    <input type="hidden" name="cx" value="002685536534722764548:dtbbvc0eg1g" />
    <input type="hidden" name="cof" value="FORID:0" />
    <input name="q" type="text" size="40" />
    <input type="submit" name="sa" value="Search" />
  </form>
  <script type="text/javascript" src="http://www.google.com/coop/cse/brand?form=searchbox_002685536534722764548%3Adtbbvc0eg1g"></script>
<!-- Google CSE Search Box Ends -->
 <a href=home.html>50s HOME</a> | <a
href=readinglist.html>READING LIST</a> | <a href=hot.html>NEWS</A> | <A
HREF=../home.html>FILREIS HOME</a></b> </center> <hr><p> Document URL:
http://www.writing.upenn.edu/~afilreis/50s/wald-on-howe.html<br> Last
modified: Thursday, 31-May-2007 09:41:32 EDT


