<html><head><!-- This document was created from RTF source by rtftohtml version
2.6 -->
</head>
<title>Letter From A Master Addict To Dangerous Drugs</title>
<body>
<h1>Letter From A Master Addict To Dangerous Drugs</h1>
<h2>British Journal of Addiction, Vol. 53, No. 2</h2>
<p>
August 3rd, 1956  <address>Venice</address><p>
<p>
Dear Doctor,<p>
<p>
Thanks
for your letter.  I enclose that article on the effects of various drugs I have
used.  I do not know if it is suitable for your publication.  I have no
objection to my name being used. <p>
	No difficulty with drinking.  no desire to use any drug.  General health
excellent. Please give my regards to Mr.----.  I use his system of exercises
daily with excellent results.<p>
	I have been thinking of writing a book on narcotic drugs if I could find a
suitable collaborator to handle the technical end.<p>
		Yours,<p>
		William Burroughs.<p>
<p>
	The use of opium and opium derivatives leads to a state that defines limits
and describes "addiction"--(The term is loosely used to indicate anything one
is used to or wants.  We speak of addiction to candy, coffee, tobacco, warm
weather, television, detective stories, crossword puzzles).   So misapplied the
term loses any useful precision of meaning.  The use of morphine leads to a
metabolic dependence on morphine.  Morphine becomes a biologic need just as
water and the user may die if he is suddenly deprived of it.  The diabetic will
die without insulin, but he is not addicted to insulin.  His need for insulin
was not brought about by the use of insulin.  He needs insulin to maintain a
normal metabolism, and so avoid the excruciatingly painful return to a normal
metabolism.<p>
	I have used a number of "narcotic" drugs over a period of twenty years.  Some
of these drugs are addicting in the above sense.  Most are not:<p>
	<p>
	<i>Opiates.</i>--Over a period of twelve years I have used opium, smoked and
taken orally (injection in the skin causes abscesses.  Injection in the vein is
unpleasant and perhaps dangerous), heroin injected in skin, vein, muscle,
sniffed (when no needle was available), morphine, dilaudid, pantopon, eukodol,
paracodine, dionine, codeine, demerol, methodone.  They are all habit forming
in varying degree.  Nor does it make much difference how the drug is
administered, smoked, sniffed, injected, taken orally, inserted in rectal
suppositories, the end result will be the same: addiction.  And a smoking habit
is as difficult to break as an intravenous injection habit.  The concept that
injection habits are particularly injurious derives from an irrational fear of
needles--("Injections poison the blood stream"-- as though the blood stream
were any less poisoned by substances absorbed from the stomach, the lungs or
the mucous membrane).  Demerol is probably less addicting than morphine.  It is
also less satisfying to the addict, and less effective as a pain killer.  While
a demerol habit is easier to break than a morphine habit, demerol is certainly
more injurious to the health and specifically to the nervous system.  I once
used demerol for three months and developed a number of distressing symptoms:
trembling hands (with morphine my hands are always steady),  progressive loss
of coordination, muscular contractions, paranoid obsessions, fear of insanity.
Finally I contracted and opportune intolerance for demerol--no doubt a measure
of self preservation--and switched to methodone.  Immediately all my symptoms
disappeared.  I may add that demerol is quite as constipating as morphine, that
it exerts an even more depressing effect on the appetite and the sexual
functions, does not, however, contract the pupils.  I have given myself
thousands of injections over a period of years with unsterilized, in fact
dirty, needles and never sustained an infection  until I used demerol.  Then I
came down with a series of abscesses one of which had to be lanced and drained.
In short demerol seems to me a more dangerous drug than morphine.  Methodone is
completely satisfying to the addict, an  excellent pain killer, at least as
addicting as morphine. <p>
	I have taken morphine for acute pain.  Any opiate that  effectively relieves
pain to an equal degree relieves withdrawal symptoms.  The conclusion is
obvious:  Any opiate that relieves pain is habit forming, and the more
effectively it relieves pain the more habit forming it is.  The habit forming
molecule, and the pain killing molecule of morphine are probably identical, and
the process by which morphine relieves pain is the same process that leads to
tolerance and addiction.  Non habit forming morphine appears to be a latter day
Philosopher's Stone.  On the other hand variations of apomorphine may prove
extremely effective in controlling the withdrawal syndrome.  But we should not
expect this drug to be a pain killer as well. <p>
	The phenomena of morphine addiction are well known and there is no reason to
go over them here.  A few points, it seems to me, have received insufficient
attention:  The metabolic incompatibility between morphine and alcohol has been
observed, but no one, so far as I know, has advanced an explanation.  If a
morphine addict drinks alcohol he experiences no agreeable or euphoric
sensations.  There is a feeling of slowly mounting discomfort, and the need for
another injection.  The alcohol seems to be short-circuited perhaps by the
liver.  I once attempted to drink in  a state of incomplete recovery from an
attack of jaundice (I was not using morphine at this time).  The metabolic
sensation was identical.  In one case the liver was partly out of action from
jaundice, in the other preoccupied, literally, by a morphine metabolism.   In
neither case could it metabolize alcohol.  If an alcoholic becomes addicted to
morphine, morphine invariably and completely displaces alcohol.    I have known
several alcoholics who began using morphine.  They were able to tolerate large
doses of morphine immediately (1 grain to a shot) without ill effects, and in a
matter of days stopped taking alcohol.  The reverse never occurs.  The morphine
addict can not tolerate alcohol when he is using morphine or suffering from
morphine withdrawal.  The ability to tolerate alcohol is a sure sign of
disintoxication. In consequence alcohol can never be substituted for morphine
directly.  Of course a disintoxicated addict may start drinking and become an
alcoholic. <p>
	During withdrawal the  addict is acutely aware of his surroundings.  Sense
impressions are sharpened to the point of hallucination.  Familiar objects seem
to stir with a writhing furtive life.  The addict is subject to a barrage of
sensations external and visceral.  He may experience flashes of beauty and
nostalgia, but the overall impression is extremely painful--(Possibly his
sensations are painful because of their intensity.  A pleasurable sensation may
become intolerable after a certain intensity is reached.)<p>
	I have noticed two special reactions of early withdrawal: (1) Everything looks
threatening; (2) mild paranoia.  The doctors and nurses appear as monsters of
evil.  In the course of several cures, I have felt myself surrounded by
dangerous lunatics.  I talked with one of Dr. Dent's patients who had just
undergone disintoxication for a pithidine habit.  He reported an identical
experience, told me that for 24 hours the nurses and the doctor "seemed brutal
and repugnant."  And everything looked blue.  And I have talked with other
addicts who experienced the same reactions.  Now the psychological basis for
paranoid notions during withdrawal is obvious.  The specific similarity of
these reactions indicates a common metabolic origin.  The similarity between
withdrawal phenomena and certain states of drug intoxication, is striking.
Hashish, Bannisteria Caapi (Hamaline), Peyote (Mescaline) produce states of
acute sensitivity, with hallucinatory viewpoint. Everything looks alive.
Paranoid ideas are frequent.  Bannisteria Caapi intoxication specifically
reproduces the state of withdrawal.  Everything looks threatening.  Paranoid
ideas are marked, especially with overdose.  After taking Bannisteria Caapi, I
was convinced that the Medicine Man and his apprentice were conspiring to
murder me.  It seems that metabolic states of the body can reproduce the
effects of various drugs.<p>
	In the U.S.A. heroin addicts are receiving an involuntary reduction cure from
the pushers who progressively dilute their wares with milk sugar and
barbiturates.  As a result many of the addicts who seek treatment are lightly
addicted so they can be completely disintoxicated in a short time (7 to 8
days).  They recover rapidly without medication.  Meanwhile any tranquilizing,
anti-allergic, or sedative drug, will afford some relief, especially if
injected.  The addict feels better if he knows that some alien substance is
coursing through his blood stream.  Tolserol, Thorazine and related
"tranquillizers," every variety of barbiturate, Chloral and Paraldehyde,
anti-histamines, cortisone, reserpine, even shock (can lobotomy be far behind?)
have all been used with results usually described as "encouraging."  My own
experience suggests that these results be accepted with some reserve.  Of
course, symptomatic treatment is indicated, and all these drugs (with possible
exception of the drug most commonly used: barbiturates) have a place in the
treatment of the withdrawal syndrome.  But none of these drugs is in itself the
answer to withdrawal.  Withdrawal symptoms vary with individual  metabolism and
physical type.  Pigeon chested, hay fever and asthma liable individuals suffer
greatly from allergic symptoms during withdrawal:  running nose, sneezing,
smarting, watering eyes, difficulty in breathing.  In such cases cortisone, and
anti-histamine drugs may afford definite relief.  Vomiting could probably be
controlled with anti-nausea drugs like thorazine.<p>
	I have undergone ten "cures" in the course of which all these drugs were used.
I have taken quick reductions, slow reductions, prolonged sleep, apomorphine,
antihistamines, a French system involving a worthless product known as
"amorphine," everything but shock.  (I would be interested to hear results of
further experiments with shock treatment on somebody else.)  The success of any
treatment depends on the degree and duration of addiction, the stage of
withdrawal (drugs which are effective in late or light withdrawal can be
disastrous in the acute phase) individual symptoms, health, age, etc.  A method
of treatment might be completely ineffective at one time, but give excellent
results at another.  Or a treatment that does me no good may help someone else.
I do not presume to pass any final judgements, only to report my own reactions
to various drugs and methods of treatment.<p>
	Reductions Cures.--This is the commonest form of treatment, and no method yet
discovered can entirely replace it in cases of severe addiction.  The patient
must have some morphine.  If there is one rule that applies to all cases of
addiction this is it.  But the morphine should be withdrawn as quickly as
possible.  I have taken slow reduction cures and in every case the result was
discouragement and eventual relapse.  Imperceptible reduction is likely to be
endless reduction.  When the addict seeks cure, he has, in most cases, already
experienced withdrawal symptoms many times.  He expects an unpleasant ordeal
and he is prepared to endure it.  But if the pain of withdrawal is spread over
two months instead of ten days he may not be able to endure it.  It is not the
intensity but the duration of pain that breaks the will to resist.  If the
addict habitually takes any quantity, however small, of any opiate to alleviate
the weakness, insomnia, boredom, restlessness, of late withdrawal, the
withdrawal symptoms will be prolonged indefinitely and complete relapse is
almost certain.<p>
	Prolonged Sleep.--The theory sounds good.  You go to sleep and wake up cured.
Industrial doses of chloral hydrate, barbiturates, thorazine, only produced a
nightmare state of semi-consciousness.  Withdrawal of sedation, after 5 days,
occasioned a severe shock.  Symptoms of acute morphine deprivation supervened.
The end result was a combined syndrome of unparalleled horror.   No cure I ever
took was as painful as this allegedly painless method. The cycle of sleep and
wakefulness is always deeply disturbed during withdrawal.  To further disturb
it with  massive sedation seems contraindicated to say the least.  Withdrawal
of morphine is sufficiently traumatic without adding to it withdrawal of
barbiturates.  After two weeks in the hospital (five  days sedation, ten days
"rest")  I was still so weak that I fainted when I tried to walk up a slight
incline.  I consider prolonged sleep the worst possible method of treating
withdrawal.<p>
	Anti-histamines.--The use of anti-histamines is based on the allergic theory
of withdrawal.  Sudden withdrawal of morphine precipitates and overproduction
of histamine with consequent allergic symptoms.  (In shock resulting from
traumatic injury with acute pain large quantities of histamine are released in
the blood.  In acute pain as in addiction toxic doses of morphine are readily
tolerated.  Rabbits,  who have a high histamine content in the blood, are
extremely resistant to morphine.)  My own experience with anti-histamines has
not  been conclusive.  I once took a cure in which anti-histamines were used,
and the results were good.  But I was lightly addicted at that time, and had
been without morphine for 72 hours when the cure started.  I have frequently
used anti-histamines since then for withdrawal symptoms with disappointing
results.  In fact they seem to increase my depression and irritability (I do
not suffer from typical allergic symptoms).<p>
	Apomorphine.--Apomorphine is certainly the best method of treating withdrawal
that I have experienced.  It does not completely eliminate the withdrawal
symptoms, but reduces them to an endurable level.  The acute symptoms such as
stomach and leg cramps, convulsive or manic states are completely controlled.
In fact apomorphine treatment involves less discomfort than a reduction cure.
Recovery is more rapid and more complete.  I feel that I was never completely
cured of the craving for morphine until I took apomorphine treatment.  Perhaps
the "psychological" craving for morphine that persists after a cure is not
psychological at all, but metabolic.  More potent variations of the apomorphine
formula might prove  qualitatively more effective in treating all forms of
addiction.<p>
	Cortisone.--Cortisone seems to give some relief especially when injected
intravenously.<p>
	Thorazine.--Provides some relief from withdrawal symptoms, but not much.  Side
effects of depression, disturbances of vision, indigestion offset dubious
benefits. <p>
	Reserpine.--I never noticed an effect whatever from this drug except a slight
depression.<p>
	Tolserol.--Negligible results.<p>
	Barbiturates.--It is common practice to prescribe barbiturates for the
insomnia of withdrawal.  Actually the use of barbiturates delays the return of
normal sleep, prolongs the whole period of withdrawal, and may lead to relapse.
(The addict is tempted to take a little codeine or paregoric with his nembutal.
Very small quantities of opiates, that would be quite innocuous for a normal
person, immediately re-establish addiction in a cured addict.)  My experience
certainly confirms Dr. Dent's statement that barbiturates are
contraindicated.<p>
	Chloral and paraldehyde.--Probably preferable to barbiturates if a sedative is
necessary, but most addicts will vomit up paraldehyde at once.  I have also
tried on my own initiative, the following drugs during withdrawal:<p>
	Alcohol.--Absolutely contraindicated at any stage of withdrawal.  The use of
alcohol invariably exacerbates the withdrawal symptoms and leads to relapse.
Alcohol can only be tolerated after metabolism returns to normal.  This usually
takes one month in cases of severe addiction.<p>
	Benzedrine.--May relieve temporarily the depression of late withdrawal,
disastrous during acute withdrawal, contraindicated at any
stage because it produces a state of nervousness for which morphine is the
physiological answer.<p>
	Cocaine.--The above goes double for cocaine.<p>
	<i>Cannabis indica</i> (marijuana).--In late or light withdrawal relieves
depression and increases the appetite, in acute withdrawal an unmitigated
disaster.  (I once smoked marijuana during early withdrawal with nightmarish
results.) Cannabis is a sensitizer.  If you feel bad already it will make you
feel worse.  Contraindicated.<p>
	Peyote, <i>Bannisteria caapi</i>.-- I have not ventured to experiment.  The
thought of Bannisteria intoxication superimposed on acute withdrawal makes the
brain reel.  I know of a man who substituted peyote during late withdrawal,
claimed to lose all desire for morphine, ultimately died of peyote poisoning.<p>
	In cases of severe addictions, definite, physical, withdrawal  symptoms
persist for one month at least.<p>
	I have never seen or heard of a psychotic morphine addict, I mean anyone who
showed psychotic symptoms while addicted to an opiate.  In fact addicts are
drearily sane.  Perhaps there is a metabolic incompatibility between
schizophrenia and opiate addiction.  On the other hand the withdrawal of
morphine often precipitates psychotic reactions--usually mild paranoia.
Interesting that drugs and methods of treatment that give results in
schizophrenia, are also of some use in withdrawal: anti-histamines,
tranquillizers, apomorphine, shock.<p>
	Sir Charles Sherington defines pain as "the psychic adjunct of an imperative
protective reflex."<p>
	The vegetative nervous system expands and contracts in response to visceral
rhythms and external stimuli, expanding to stimuli which are experienced as
pleasurable--sex, food, agreeable social contacts, etc.--contracting from pain,
anxiety, fear, discomfort, boredom.  Morphine alters the whole cycle of
expansion and contraction, release and tension.  The sexual function is
deactivated, peristalsis inhibited, the pupils cease to react in response to
light and darkness.  The organism neither contracts from pain nor expands to
normal sources of pleasure.  It adjusts to a morphine cycle.  The addict is
immune to boredom.  He can look at his shoe for hours or simply stay in bed. He
needs no sexual outlet, no social contacts, now work, no diversion, no
exercise, nothing but morphine.    Morphine may relieve pain by imparting to
the organism some of the qualities of a plant.  (Pain could have no function
for plants which are, for the most part, stationary, incapable of protective
reflexes.)<p>
	Scientists look for a non-habit forming morphine that will kill pain without
giving pleasure, addicts want--or think they want--euphoria without addiction.
I do not see how the functions of morphine can be separated, I think that any
effective pain killer will depress the sexual function, induce euphoria and
cause addiction.  The perfect pain killer would probably be immediately habit
forming.  (If anyone is interested to develop such a drug, dehydro-oxyheroin
might be a good place to start.)<p>
	The addict exists in a painless, sexless, timeless state.  Transition back to
the rhythms of animal life involves the withdrawal syndrome.  I doubt if this
transition can ever be made in comfort.  Painless withdrawal can only be
approached.<p>
<p>
	<i>Cocaine</i>.--Cocaine is the most exhilarating drug I have ever used.  The
euphoria centres in the head.  Perhaps the drug activates pleasure connections
directly in the brain.  I suspect that an electric current in the  right place
would produce the same effect.  The full exhilaration of cocaine can only be
realised by an intravenous injection.  The pleasurable effects do not last more
than five or ten minutes.  If the drug is injected in the skin, rapid
elimination vitiates the effects.  This goes double for sniffing.<p>
	It is standard practice for cocaine users to sit up all night shooting cocaine
at one minute intervals, alternating with shots of heroin, or cocaine and
heroin mixed in the same injection to form a "speed ball." (I have never known
an habitual cocaine user who was not a morphine addict.)<p>
	The desire for cocaine can be intense.  I have spent whole days walking from
one drug store to another to fill a cocaine prescription.  You may want cocaine
intensely , but you don't have any metabolic need for it.  If you can't get
cocaine you eat, you go to sleep and forget it.  I have talked with people who
used cocaine for years, then were suddenly cut off from their supply.  None of
them experienced any withdrawal symptoms.  Indeed it is difficult to see how a
front brain stimulant could be addicting.  Addiction seems to be  a monopoly of
sedatives.<p>
	Continued use of cocaine leads to nervousness, depression, sometimes drug
psychosis with paranoid hallucinations.  The nervousness and depression
resulting from cocaine use are not alleviated by more cocaine.  They are
effectively relieved by morphine.  The use of cocaine by a morphine addict,
always leads to larger and more frequent injections of morphine.<p>
	<p>
	<i>Cannabis Indica</i> (hashish, marijuana).--The effects of this drug have
been frequently and luridly described: disturbance of space-time perception,
acute sensitivity to impressions, flight of ideas, laughing jags, silliness.
Marijuana is a sensitizer, and the results are not always pleasant.  It makes a
bad situation worse. Depression becomes despair, anxiety panic.  I have already
mentioned my horrible experience with marijuana during acute morphine
withdrawal.   I once gave marijuana to a guest who was mildly anxious about
something ("On bum kicks" as he put it).  After smoking half a cigarette he
suddenly leapt to his feet screaming "I got the fear!" and rushed out of the
house.<p>
	An especially unnerving feature of marijuana intoxication is a disturbance of
the affective orientation.  You do not know whether you like something or not,
whether a sensation is pleasant or unpleasant.<p>
	The use of marijuana varies greatly with the individual.  Some smoke it
constantly, some occasionally, not a few dislike it intensely.  It seems to be
especially unpopular with confirmed morphine addicts, many of whom take a
puritanical view of marijuana smoking.<p>
	The ill effects of marijuana have been grossly exaggerated in the U.S.  Our
national drug is alcohol.  We tend to regard the use of any other drug with
special horror.  Anyone given to these alien vices deserves the complete ruin
of his mind and body.  People believe what they want to believe without regard
for the facts.  Marijuana is not habit forming.  I have never seen evidence of
any ill effects from moderate use.  Drug psychosis may result from prolonged
and excessive use.<p>
<p>
	Barbiturates.--The barbiturates are definitely addicting if taken in large
quantities over any period of time (about a gramme a day will cause addiction).
Withdrawal syndrome is more dangerous than morphine withdrawal, consisting of
hallucinations with epilepsy type convulsions.  Addicts often injure themselves
flopping about on concrete floors (concrete floors being a usual corollary of
abrupt withdrawal).  Morphine addicts often take barbiturates to potentiate
inadequate morphine rations.  Some of them become barbiturate addicts as
well.<p>
	I once took two nembutal capsules (one an a half grain each) every night for
four months and suffered no withdrawal symptoms.  Barbiturate addiction is a
question of quantity.  It is probably not a metabolic addiction like morphine,
but a mechanical reaction from excessive front brain sedation.<p>
	The barbiturate addict presents a shocking spectacle.  He can not coordinate,
he staggers, falls off bar stools, goes to sleep in the middle of a sentence,
drops food out of his mouth.  He is confused, quarrelsome and stupid.  And he
almost always uses other drugs, anything he can lay hands on: alcohol,
benzedrene, opiates, marijuana.  Barbiturate users are looked down on in addict
society: "Goof ball bums.  They got no class to them."  The next step down is
coal gas and milk, or sniffing ammonia in a bucket--"The scrub woman's kick."<p>
	It seems to me that barbiturates cause the worst possible form of addiction,
unsightly, deteriorating, difficult to treat.<p>
<p>
	Benzedrene.--This is a cerebral stimulant like cocaine.  Large doses cause
prolonged sleeplessness with feelings of exhilaration.  The period of euphoria
is followed by a horrible depression.  The drug tends to increase anxiety.  It
causes indigestion and loss of appetite.<p>
	I know of only one case where definite symptoms followed the withdrawal of
benzedrene.  This was a woman of my acquaintance who used incredible quantities
of benzedrene for six months.  During this period she developed a drug
psychosis and was hospitalized for ten days.  She continued the use of
benzedrene, but was suddenly cut off.  She suffered an asthma type seizure.
She could not get her breath and turned blue.  I gave her a dose of
anti-histamine (thepherene) which afforded immediate relief.  The symptoms did
not return.<p>
<p>
	Peyote (mescaline).--This is undoubtedly a stimulant.  It dilates the pupils,
keeps one awake.  Peyote is extremely nauseating.  Users experience difficulty
keeping it down long enough to realize the effect, which is similar, in some
respects, to marijuana.  There is increased sensitivity to impression,
especially to colours.  Peyote intoxication causes a peculiar vegetable
consciousness or identification with the plant.  Everything looks like a peyote
plant.   It is easy to understand why the Indians believe there is a resident
spirit in the peyote cactus.<p>
	Overdose of peyote may lead to respiratory paralysis and death.  I know of one
case.  There is no reason to believe that peyote is addicting.<p>
	<p>
	<i>Bannisteria caapi</i> (Harmaline, Banisterine, Telepathine). -- Bannisteria
caapi is a fast growing vine.  The active principle is apparently found
throughout the wood of the fresh cut vine.  The inner bark is considered most
active, and the leaves are never used.  It takes a considerable quantity of the
vine to feel the full effects of the drug.  About five pieces of vine each
eight inches long are needed for one person.  The vine is crushed and boiled
for two or more hours with the leaves of a bush identified as <i>Palicourea sp.
rubiaceae</i>.<p>
	Yage or Ayuahuaska (the most commonly used Indian names for Bannisteria caapi)
is a hallucinating narcotic that produces a profound derangement of the senses.
In overdose it is a strong convulsant poison.  The antidote is a barbiturate or
other strong, anti-convulsant sedative.  Anyone taking Yage for the first time
should have a sedative ready in the even of an overdose.<p>
	The hallucinating properties of Yage have led to its use by Medicine Men to
potentiate their powers.  They also use it as a cure-all in the treatment of
various illnesses.  Yage lowers the body temperature and consequently is of
some use in the treatment of fever.  It is a powerful antihelminthic, indicated
for treatment of stomach or intestinal worms.  Yage induces a state of
conscious anaesthesia, and is used in rites where the initiates must undergo a
painful ordeal like whipping with knotted vines, or exposure to the sting of
ants.<p>
	So far as I could discover only the fresh cut vine is active.  I found no way
to dry, extract or preserve the  active principal.  No tinctures proved active.
The dried vine is completely inert.  The pharmacology of Yage requires
laboratory research.  Since the crude extract is such a powerful, hallucinating
narcotic, perhaps even more spectacular results could be obtained with
synthetic variations.  Certainly the matter warrants further research.<a
href="#fn0">[1]</a><p>
	I did not observe any ill effects that could be attributed to the use of Yage.
The Medicine Men who use it continuously in the line of duty seem to enjoy
normal health.  Tolerance is soon acquired so that one can drink the extract
without nausea or other ill effect. <p>
	Yage is a unique narcotic.  Yage intoxication is in some respects similar to
intoxication with hashish.  In both instances there is a shift of viewpoint, an
extension of consciousness beyond ordinary experience.  But Yage produces a
deeper derangement of  the  senses with actual hallucinations.  Blue flashes in
front of the eyes is peculiar to Yage intoxication.<p>
	There is a wide range of attitude  in regard to Yage.  Many Indians and most
White users seem to regard it simply as another intoxicant like liquor.  In
other groups it has ritual use and significance.  Among the Jivaro young men
take Yage to contact the spirits  of their ancestors and get a briefing for
their future life.  It is used during initiations to anaesthetize the initiates
for painful ordeals.  All Medicine Men use it in their practice to foretell the
future, locate lost or stolen objects, name the perpetrator of a crime, to
diagnose and treat illness.<p>
	The alkaloid of Bannisteria caapi was isolated in 1923 by Fisher Cardenas.  He
called the alkaloid Telepathine alternately Banisterine.  Rumf showed that
Telepathine was identical with Harmine, the alkaloid of Perganum Harmala.<p>
	Bannisteria caapi is evidently not habit forming.<p>
	Nutmeg.--Convicts and sailors sometimes have recourse to nutmeg.  About a
teaspoon is swallowed with water.  Results are vaguely similar to marijuana
with side effects of headache and nausea.  Death would probably supervene
before addiction if such addiction is possible.  I have only  taken nutmeg
once.<p>
	There are a number of narcotics of the nutmeg family in use among the Indians
of South America. They are usually administered by sniffing a dried powder of
the plant.  The Medicine Men take these noxious substances, and go into
convulsive states.  Their twitching and mutterings are thought to have
prophetic significance.  A friend of mine was violently sick  for three days
after experimenting with a drug of  the nutmeg family in South America.<p>
<p>
	Datura-scopolamine.--Morphine addicts are frequently poisoned by taking
morphine in combination with scopolamine.<p>
	I once obtained some ampoules each of which contained one-sixth grain of
morphine and one-hundredth grain of scopolamine.  Thinking that one-hundredth
grain was a negligible quantity, I took six ampoules in one injection.  The
result was a psychotic state lasting some hours during which I was opportunely
restrained by my long suffering landlord.  I remembered nothing the following
day.<p>
	Drugs of the datura group are used by the Indians of South America and Mexico.
Fatalities are said to be frequent.<p>
	Scopolamine has been used by the Russians as a confession drug with dubious
results.  The subject may be willing to reveal his secrets, but quite unable to
remember them.  Often cover story and secret information are inextricably
garbled.  I understand that mescaline has been very successful in extracting
information from suspects.<p>
<p>
	Morphine addiction is a metabolic illness brought about by the use of
morphine.  In my opinion psychological treatment is not only useless it is
contraindicated.  Statistically the people who become addicted to morphine are
those who have access to it: doctors, nurses, anyone in contact with black
market sources.  In Persia where opium is sold without control, 70 per cent of
the adult population is addicted.  So we should psycho-analyser several million
Persians to find out what deep conflicts and anxieties have driven them to the
use of opium?  I think not.  According to my experience most addicts are not
neurotic and do not need psychotherapy.  Apomorphine treatment and access to
apomorphine in the event of relapse would certainly give a higher percentage of
permanent cures than any programme of "psychological rehabilitation."<p>
<p>
<hr>
<a name="fn0">
1 Since this was published I have discovered that the alkaloid of Bannisteria
are closely related to LSD6, which has been used to produce experimental
psychosis.  I think they are up to LSD25 already.
</body></html>