<html>

<head><!-- SHU Google Tag Manager --><script>(function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start':new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0],j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src='https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f);})(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-KQKT8JL');</script><!-- End SHU Google Tag Manager -->
<title>HerbArch</title>
<meta HTTP-EQUIV="Content-Type" CONTENT="text/html; charset=windows-1252">
<meta NAME="GENERATOR" CONTENT="Microsoft FrontPage 3.0">
</head>

<body><!-- SHU Google Tag Manager (noscript) --><noscript><iframe src='https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-KQKT8JL' height='0' width='0' style='display:none;visibility:hidden'></iframe></noscript><!-- End SHU Google Tag Manager (noscript) -->

<p ALIGN="CENTER">The Church as Text in George Herbert&#146;s <i>Temple</i> and <i>Country
Parson</p>
</i>

<p>Though George Herbert&#146;s major poetry sequence uses a structuring architectural
metaphor, surprisingly little has been written about Herbert&#146;s concern with church
buildings themselves. Though he was a priest, and though he named parts of a church
throughout <i>The Temple</i>, critics typically make no attempt to relate his written work
to the physical structures in which he worshipped and ministered and which, in a number of
cases, he helped rebuild and even redesign. Herbert wrote at a time when the arranging of
church interiors was anything but irrelevant. With the Reformation came a re-evaluation of
the uses of the church building. Long-standing hierarchical and mystical conceptions of
sacred space were challenged by a new imperative to demystify and to share that space. The
Edwardian <i>Book of Common Prayer</i> demanded a new level of commonality within the
church building itself, opening notions of the church building and its uses to questioning
through to the 1630s, when Herbert ministered, and beyond, as the conflict between
Laudians and Puritans came to a head. In short, Herbert wrote about the church building at
a time when it was most in question, in the midst of what could be termed a crisis of
sacred space. Positions here ranged from moves to reestablish the medieval sense of awe
and power of the church to the demands of radical reformers (Henry Barrow) that all Romish
churches should be torn down. I argue that Herbert&#146;s achievement was in asserting the
church building as a positive teaching space, rather than allowing prevailing controversy
to turn the church into an arena of doctrinal conflict. Herbert taught readers to find
their own stories in the gospel message of the church building, much as he taught readers
to find their own stories in Scripture. I will argue that, in treating it as a text to be
read, Herbert accomplished a particularly Protestant sanctification of the church
building, though not one without contradictions. </p>
<b>

<p>Writing the Church</p>
</b>

<p>The value George Herbert places on architecture in his poetry is borne out in his
re-building of actual churches. As Amy Charles points out<i>,</i> he rebuilt three
churches during his life. Of these, the most well known is the stone cruciform church of
Leighton Bromswold. Herbert became prebend of Leighton Ecclesia in 1626, at which time the
church had not been in use for almost twenty years. Instead, services were being held in
the manor hall of the Duke of Lennox. As Charles puts it, for Herbert &quot;with his sense
of what was fitting and proper in everything related to the worship of God,&quot; it was
&quot;intolerable for a church to remain in this state&quot; (128). His passionate belief
that the church had to be rebuilt tells us that for him, the place that the congregation
gathered had real importance. As Izaac Walton records, Herbert&#146;s mother tried to
persuade him not to rebuild Leighton Bromswold, saying &quot;George, it is not for your
weak body and empty purse to undertake to build churches&quot; (283). Herbert went on to
fight against failing health and to raise money from his many well-placed friends in order
to see the church rebuilding begun. Walton writes that he made the rebuilding</p>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>so much his whole business that he became restless, till he saw it finished as it now
    stands; being, for the workmanship, a costly mosaic; for the form, an exact cross; and for
    the decency and beauty, I am assured it is the most remarkable parish church that this
    nation affords. (282-83)</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>In rebuilding this church, Herbert consciously wrote sacred space, producing a building
of expensive workmanship which the congregation could read according to the mode of <i>The
Temple</i>, learning about themselves in God. Herbert&#146;s intentionality in writing
sacred space surfaces in his design for the pulpit and the reading pew of the church.
Usually, the reading pew took its place below the level of the pulpit, indicating a
hierarchy of importance between the functions performed at the two places. Herbert,
however, did not agree with this arrangement. Walton writes that</p>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>by his order, the reading pew and pulpit were a little distant from each other and both
    of an equal height; for he would often say, &#145;They should neither have a precedency or
    priority of the other, but that prayer and preaching, being equally useful, might agree
    like bretheren and have an equal honour and estimation&#146; (283)</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>Herbert consciously shaped the church building along the lines of the reformed liturgy:
he designs the building assuming that the congregation will understand its message. In
chapter thirteen of <i>The Country Parson, </i>entitled &quot;The Parson&#146;s
Church,&quot; Herbert sets out rules giving further details on the establishment of sacred
space. He says that the &quot;country parson has a special care of his church, that all
things there be decent and befitting His name by which it is called&quot; (221). To this
end, he gives four rules; first, that &quot;all things be in good repair,&quot; second,
&quot;that the church be swept and kept clean . . . and at great festivals strawed and
stuck with boughs, and perfumed with incense,&quot; third, that there &quot;be fit and
proper texts of Scripture everywhere painted, and that all the painting be grave and
reverend, not with light colours or foolish antics,&quot; and forth, that all books
&quot;appointed by authority&quot; be kept there in good condition, that the communion
cloth be linen and &quot;fitting and sightly,&quot; and that a poor-man&#146;s box be
conveniently located within the church (221-22).</p>

<p>While Herbert makes clear that his treatment of the church building is not intended to
&quot;put a holiness in things&quot; (222), it remains that he has a precise sense of what
the building should communicate to those in it, and of what activities should take place
there. The church itself should not be worshipped; instead, the building should point the
way to God, should tell the Gospel story. For Herbert, doing things in order and doing
things to the edification of all are foundational rules of worship, which
&quot;excellently <i>score out</i> the way, and fully and exactly contain, even in
external and indifferent things, what course is to be taken, and put them to great shame
who deny the Scripture to be perfect&quot; (222, italics mine). The principles of
scripture are scored out, written in the architecture of the church, so that all may read
and understand.</p>
<b>

<p>Reading the Church</p>
</b>

<p>To argue that Herbert treats the church building like a text, one must consider how he
treats literal texts, most notably, the Bible. This he describes in &quot;H. Scriptures
II:&quot;</p>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>O that I knew how all thy lights combine,</p>
    <blockquote>
      <blockquote>
        <p>And the configurations of their glory!</p>
        <p>Seeing not only how each verse doth shine,</p>
      </blockquote>
    </blockquote>
    <p>But all the constellations of the story.</p>
    <p>This verse marks that, and both do make a motion</p>
    <blockquote>
      <blockquote>
        <p>Unto a third, that ten leaves off doth lie:</p>
        <p>Then as dispersed herbs do watch a potion,</p>
      </blockquote>
    </blockquote>
    <p>These three do make up some Christian&#146;s destiny:</p>
    <p>Such are thy secrets, which my life makes good,</p>
    <blockquote>
      <blockquote>
        <p>And comments on thee: for in ev&#146;rything</p>
        <p>Thy words do find me out, and parallels bring,</p>
      </blockquote>
    </blockquote>
    <p>And in another make me understood.</p>
    <blockquote>
      <blockquote>
        <p>Stars are poor books, and oftentimes do miss:</p>
        <p>This book of stars lights to eternal bliss.</p>
      </blockquote>
    </blockquote>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>Dayton Haskin describes this reading method as typically Protestant; in it,
&quot;interpretive discovery is presented in a topographical language that suggests a
conception of the Book as a vast field, or set of fields, filled with &#145;places&#146;
that bear potential relations to one another.&quot; (2) The ultimate goal of this type of
reading is to find oneself through collating textual places; in this way, the Bible
becomes not only God&#146;s Word to the Church, but God&#146;s Word to the individual
believer. In reading the Bible, Herbert finally reads himself; he understands scripture in
a highly personal way, saying &quot;[t]hy words do find me out.&quot; Notably, he finds in
his reading an astrological sense of mystery: the Bible holds &quot;secrets&quot; of
&quot;destiny,&quot; unlocked when read by the individual Christian. If the Bible is the
chief text to be read by the believer, then for Herbert, church architecture acts as an
important supporting text. In his poem &quot;The Church-Floor,&quot; Herbert gathers
physical places, collating them into a personal message in a way that parallels his
reading of scripture:</p>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>Mark you the floor? that square and speckled stone,</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>Which looks so firm and strong,</p>

<p>Is <i>Patience:</p>
</i>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>And th&#146; other black and grave, wherewith each one</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>Is checkered all along,</p>

<p><i>Humility:</p>
</i>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>The gentle rising, which on either hand</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>Leads to the Choir above,</p>

<p>Is <i>Confidence:</p>
</i>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>But the sweet cement, which in one sure band</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>Ties the whole frame, is <i>Love</p>

<p></i>And <i>Charity.</p>
</i>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <blockquote>
      <blockquote>
        <p>Hither sometimes Sin steals, and stains</p>
        <p>The marble&#146;s neat and curious veins:</p>
      </blockquote>
    </blockquote>
    <p>But all is cleansed when the marble weeps.</p>
    <blockquote>
      <blockquote>
        <p>Sometimes Death, puffing at the door,</p>
        <p>Blows all the dust about the floor:</p>
      </blockquote>
    </blockquote>
    <p>But while he thinks to spoil the room, he sweeps.</p>
    <blockquote>
      <blockquote>
        <p>Blessed be the <i>Architect</i>, whose art</p>
        <p>Could build so strong in a weak heart.</p>
      </blockquote>
    </blockquote>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>As Stanley Fish argues, the objects of the poem are &quot;first distinguished (from
each other and from the reader) and then brought together, as the architectural metaphor
becomes alive and is finally interiorized.&quot; He goes on to say that &quot;the strategy
succeeds when the reader is no longer trying to make these distinctions, but discovers
himself signified by each and every one of them (he discovers what he is)&quot; (78-79).
The similarity between the way that Herbert reads the Bible and the way he reads the
church building is striking. He approaches both with a confident, self-authorizing reading
which mediates the link between himself and God. While Fish argues correctly that Herbert
de-emphasizes the material in favour of the spiritual, Herbert&#146;s choice of material
text is neither arbitrary nor unimportant. Herbert grants the church building a status in
his poetry similar to that of the Bible and the liturgy, presenting it as one of the few
sacred texts which he consistently reads to discover himself in relation to God. Herbert
treats the church building as a common space, which can and should be interpreted by the
individual for spiritual insight. As the Bible and the liturgy have been translated into
the &quot;Engliyshe tongue, to the end that the congregacion maye be thereby
edified,&quot; (BCP 323) Herbert too opens up the church building to common understanding,
teaching his readership to find themselves in it, upon their own meditation.</p>

<p>Herbert finds in the church floor signs of the most profound Christian truths. The
final eclipsing of the earthly architect by the heavenly one should be understood not as a
minimalizing of the earthly, but instead, as the raising of that architect and
architecture to a sacramental level. In the design of the church, with its incorporation
of differing elements, Herbert sees a model of the great design. Significantly, Herbert
does not launch into consideration of any technical or learned aspects of architecture. As
Fish argues, Herbert writes as a country parson, leading people without formal education
into spiritual growth. His architectural language is one that any parishioner could
understand: pointing to this stone, to the next stone, to the cement that joins them. In
its simplicity, however, Herbert&#146;s description of the materiality of the church opens
the mind, investing the floor that all walk on every Sunday with an expansive spiritual
significance.</p>

<p>Herbert also models his way of reading the church building in his poem &quot;The
Windows,&quot; in which he addresses the paradoxical position of himself as a preacher,
fallen, yet presenting the word of God. He writes:</p>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>Lord, how can man preach thy eternal word?</p>
    <blockquote>
      <blockquote>
        <p>He is a brittle crazy glass:</p>
      </blockquote>
    </blockquote>
    <p>Yet in thy temple thou dost him afford</p>
    <blockquote>
      <blockquote>
        <p>This glorious and transcendent place,</p>
      </blockquote>
    </blockquote>
    <p>To be a window, through thy grace.</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>The preacher, otherwise flawed to the point of uselessness, becomes transformed when
God affords him a place in the temple. On his own, he is a glass which is cracked and
ready to fall to pieces; however, when God &quot;anneals in glasse [his] storie,&quot; (6)
he becomes a glorious window. The very infirmity of the preacher provides the material for
transcendence. Again, Herbert takes a physical place in the church and reads it as sacred
text, finding a place for the reader within it. If God transforms the preacher by using
him as a window, making His &quot;life to shine within&quot; (l. 7-8), then Herbert&#146;s
reading of the preacher into the architecture of the church also transforms: he first
recognizes himself in the church window, then recognizes Christ within himself. Herbert,
in effect, claims the church as a text he as an individual believer can read, and then
finds a place in it. By extension, he teaches his reader to treat the church building as a
personal space, a place that all believers can read for themselves through the Holy
Spirit&#146;s empowering.</p>
<b>

<p>The Politics of Reading the Church</p>
</b>

<p>However, Herbert finds himself in a paradoxical position. As an individual believer, he
can read the church building with freedom, collating its places and finding his own place
as he will. As a priest, however, he writes the building, constraining the readings of his
parishioners by his own vision of worship. The interpretive authority of the individual
believer conflicts with the ruling authority of the priest here, and it seems that
commonality itself must follow the authority of the priest. The common worship laid out by
the Prayer Book, as with the more overtly hierarchical worship laid out by the medieval
church before it, is still taught to the laity, enforced by the clergy.</p>

<p>Herbert both defines and is defined by the sacred space of the church, reflecting a
central concern of his writing: the paradoxical position of the priest as both a servant
and a leader. In the common space of the reformation church, the building alone apparently
cannot sufficiently communicate the sacredness of its purpose, and so the priest must
himself actualize this sense, producing a living spectacle of holiness. In chapter six of <i>The
Country Parson, </i>entitled &quot;The Parson Praying,&quot; Herbert writes:</p>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>The country parson, when he is to read divine services, composeth himself to all
    possible reverence, lifting up his heart and hands and eyes, and using all other gestures
    which may express a hearty and unfeigned devotion. This he doth, first, as being truly
    touched and amazed with the Majesty of God, before whom he then presents himself; yet not
    as himself alone, but as presenting with himself the whole congregation, whose sins he
    then bears and brings with his own to the heavenly altar to be bathed and washed in the
    sacred laver of Christ&#146;s blood. Secondly, as this is the true reason of his inward
    fear, so he is content to express this outwardly to the utmost of his power; that being
    first affected himself, he may also affect his people, knowing that no sermon moves them
    so much to a reverence, which they forget again when they come to pray, as a devout
    behaviour in the very act of praying. (207)</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>Herbert describes here a kind of holy theatre, in which the insight of the priest must
dramatically be displayed in order to inspire in the congregation an emotional
understanding of the doctrine being communicated. In the medieval church, awe was produced
in that the congregation did not see the priest pray; now that the priest and congregation
are praying together, awe must be produced by the priest himself. </p>

<p>Herbert&#146;s intent in this production of reverence is clearly that of a good priest.
His actions flow out of his love for God and out of his desire that his congregation
understand God in the same way he does. It also seems reasonable to assume that, in
leading worship in this way, Herbert as priest would be fulfilling the expectations and in
some cases the desires of his congregation. However, as Michael Schoenfeldt observes,
Herbert nonetheless exercises control:</p>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>The parson&#146;s act of self-composure, like the poet&#146;s act of composition, is a
    creative and coercive gesture. Profoundly aware at once of the effect of his divine
    auditor upon him and of the effect his conduct has upon his congregation, the parson, like
    the devotional poet, addresses two very different audiences involving opposite political
    situations. Moved by the one and moving the other, parson and devotional poet must submit
    and control, amaze and be amazed, simultaneously. (1)</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>The priest&#146;s coercive actions problematize the commonality of Prayer Book worship.
Though every believer must depend individually upon Christ for salvation, the church still
mediates that relationship, guiding the individual in the interpretation of holy
scripture, and, as with Herbert, in the interpretation of sacred space. Here then, is what
I referred to earlier as a crisis of sacred space, that even as authorities open the
church building to a new commonality, they feel compelled to circumscribe that
commonality. As Herbert encourages his parishioners to participate fully in interpreting
sacred space, he also must control those interpretations.</p>

<p>The Prayer Book establishes that the whole congregation, not only the clergy, acts out
the liturgy together. To this end, Herbert&#146;s sensitivity to the holy theatre of the
priest parallels his demand that the congregation also play out its role well. He says
that, besides the example of sanctity being performed by the priest, </p>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <p>he having often instructed his people how to carry themselves in divine service, exacts
    of them all possible reverence, by no means enduring either talking, or sleeping, or
    gazing, or leaning, or half-kneeling, or any undutiful behaviour in them, but causing
    them, when they sit, or stand, or kneel, to do all in a straight and steady posture, as
    attending to what is done in the church, and everyone, man and child, answering aloud both
    Amen and all other answers, which are on the clerk&#146;s and people&#146;s part to
    answer; which answers are not to be done in a huddling or slubbering fashion, gaping, or
    scratching the head, or spitting even in the midst of their answer, but gently and
    pauseably, thinking what they say. (207-08)</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>

<p>If the congregation is to share sacred space, then they themselves must take part in
producing it. It seems that, for Herbert, the freedom of interpretation of <i>The Temple</i>
can only follow observance of the strict guidelines of <i>The Country Parson</i>.
Herbert&#146;s negotiation of sacred space, then, follows in the Christian paradox
explored by Milton not long after, that freedom follows obedience. Unlike the medieval
church, in which sacred space is constructed out of architectural divisions and set
ritual, the sacredness Herbert describes dwells in the interiority of the congregation.
Because of this interiority, sacred space becomes dynamic, not static: always,
continually, being produced by those present. The church building is now not itself
sacred, but is read to produce the sacred in the congregation.</p>
<font FACE="Times New">

<p ALIGN="CENTER">Works Cited</p>

<blockquote>
  <blockquote>
    <u><p>The First and Second Prayer Books of King Edward the Sixth</u>. London: J. M. Dent,
    1920.</p>
    <p>Addleshaw, G. W. O., and Frederick Etchells. <u>The Architectural Setting of Anglican
    Worship : An Inquiry into the Arrangements for Public Worship in the Church of England
    From the Reformation to the Present Day</u>. London: Faber and Faber, 1948.</p>
    <p>Charles, Amy. <u>A Life of George Herbert</u>. Ithaca: Cornell U P, 1977.</p>
    <p>Fish, Stanley. <u>The Living Temple: George Herbert and Catechizing</u>. Berkeley:
    University of California Press, 1978.</p>
    <p>Haskin, Dayton. <u>Milton's Burden of Interpretation</u>. Pittsburgh: U Penn Press,
    1994.</p>
    <p>Herbert, George. <u>The Complete English Poems</u>. Ed. John Tobin. London: Penguin,
    1991.</p>
    <p>Schoenfeldt, Michael. <u>Prayer and Power: George Herbert and Renaissance Courtship</u>.
    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.</p>
    <p>Endnotes:</p>
  </blockquote>
</blockquote>
</font>
</body>
</html>
