<html>

<head>

<title>The Life of Savage</title>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="texts.css">

</head>

<body>

<h1 align="center">The Life of Savage</h1>

<h2 align="center">By <a 
href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Johnson/">Samuel Johnson</a></h2>

<div class="headnote">

<p>The text is taken from George Birkbeck Hill's edition of 
<cite>The Lives of the Poets</cite>.  Please send all corrections 
and comments to <a 
href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/contact.html">Jack 
Lynch</a>.</p>

</div>

<hr>

<p><span class="par">[1]</span> IT has been observed in all ages 
that the advantages of nature or of fortune have contributed very 
little to the promotion of happiness; and that those whom the 
splendour of their rank or the extent of their capacity have 
placed upon the summits of human life, have not often given any 
just occasion to envy in those who look up to them from a lower 
station: whether it be that apparent superiority incites great 
designs, and great designs are naturally liable to fatal 
miscarriages; or that the general lot of mankind is misery, and 
the misfortunes of those whose eminence drew upon them an 
universal attention have been more carefully recorded, because 
they were more generally observed, and have in reality been only 
more conspicuous than those of others, not more frequent, or more 
severe.</p>

<p><span class="par">[2]</span> That affluence and power, 
advantages extrinsick and adventitious, and therefore easily 
separable from those by whom they are possessed, should very 
often flatter the mind with expectations of felicity which they 
cannot give, raises no astonishment: but it seems rational to 
hope that intellectual greatness should produce better effects; 
that minds qualified for great attainments should first endeavour 
their own benefit; and that they who are most able to teach 
others the way to happiness should with most certainty follow it 
themselves.</p>

<p><span class="par">[3]</span> But this expectation, however 
plausible, has been very frequently disappointed. The heroes of 
literary as well as civil history have been very often no less 
remarkable for what [they have suffered than for what] they have 
atchieved; and volumes have been written only to enumerate the 
miseries of the learned, and relate their unhappy lives and 
untimely deaths.</p>

<p><span class="par">[4]</span> To these mournful narratives I am 
about to add the <cite>Life of Richard Savage</cite>, a man whose 
writings entitle him to an eminent rank in the classes of 
learning, and whose misfortunes claim a degree of compassion not 
always due to the unhappy, as they were often the consequences of 
the crimes of others rather than his own.</p>

<p><span class="par">[5]</span> In the year 1697 Anne Countess of 
Macclesfield, having lived for some time upon very uneasy terms 
with her husband, thought a public confession of adultery the 
most obvious and expeditious method of obtaining her liberty, and 
therefore declared that the child, with which she was then great, 
was begotten by the Earl Rivers. This, as may be imagined, made 
her husband no less desirous of a separation than herself, and he 
prosecuted his design in the most effectual manner; for he 
applied not to the ecclesiastical courts for a divorce, but to 
the parliament for an act, by which his marriage might be 
dissolved, the nuptial contract totally annulled, and the 
children of his wife illegitimated. This act, after the usual 
deliberation, he obtained, though without the approbation of 
some, who considered marriage as an affair only cognizable by 
ecclesiastical judges; and on March 3d was separated from his 
wife, whose fortune, which was very great, was repaid her, and 
who having, as well as her husband, the liberty of making another 
choice, was in a short time married to Colonel Brett.</p>

<p><span class="par">[6]</span> While the Earl of Macclesfield 
was prosecuting this affair his wife was, on the 10th of January, 
1697-8, delivered of a son, and the Earl Rivers, by appearing to 
consider him as his own, left none any reason to doubt of the 
sincerity of her declaration; for he was his godfather, and gave 
him his own name, which was by his direction inserted in the 
register of St. Andrew's parish in Holborn, but unfortunately 
left him to the care of his mother, whom, as she was now set free 
from her husband, he probably imagined likely to treat with great 
tenderness the child that had contributed to so pleasing an 
event. It is not indeed easy to discover what motives could be 
found to overbalance that natural affection of a parent, or what 
interest could be promoted by neglect or cruelty. The dread of 
shame or of poverty, by which some wretches have been incited to 
abandon or to murder their children, cannot be supposed to have 
affected a woman who had proclaimed her crimes and solicited 
reproach, and on whom the clemency of the legislature had 
undeservedly bestowed a fortune, which would have been very 
little diminished by the expences which the care of her child 
could have brought upon her. It was therefore not likely that she 
would be wicked without temptation, that she would look upon her 
son from his birth with a kind of resentment and abhorrence, and, 
instead of supporting, assisting, and defending him, delight to 
see him struggling with misery; or that she would take every 
opportunity of aggravating his misfortunes and obstructing his 
resources, and with an implacable and restless cruelty continue 
her persecution from the first hour of his life to the last.</p>

<p><span class="par">[7]</span> But whatever were her motives, no 
sooner was her son born than she discovered a resolution of 
disowning him; and in a very short time removed him from her 
sight by committing him to the care of a poor woman, whom she 
directed to educate him as her own, and injoined never to inform 
him of his true parents.</p>

<p><span class="par">[8]</span> Such was the beginning of the 
life of Richard Savage. Born with a legal claim to honour and to 
affluence he was in two months illegitimated by the parliament 
and disowned by his mother, doomed to poverty and obscurity, and 
launched upon the ocean of life only that he might be swallowed 
by its quicksands or dashed upon its rocks.</p>

<p><span class="par">[9]</span> His mother could not indeed 
infect others with the same cruelty. As it was impossible to 
avoid the inquiries which the curiosity or tenderness of her 
relations made after her child, she was obliged to give some 
account of the measures that she had taken; and her mother, the 
Lady Mason, whether in approbation of her design or to prevent 
more criminal contrivances, engaged to transact with the nurse, 
to pay her for her care, and to superintend the education of the 
child.</p>

<p><span class="par">[10]</span> In this charitable office she 
was assisted by his godmother Mrs. Lloyd, who, while she lived, 
always looked upon him with that tenderness, which the barbarity 
of his mother made peculiarly necessary; but her death, which 
happened in his tenth year, was another of the misfortunes of his 
childhood: for though she kindly endeavoured to alleviate his 
loss by a legacy of three hundred pounds, yet, as he had none to 
prosecute his claim, to shelter him from oppression, or call in 
law to the assistance of justice, her will was eluded by the 
executors, and no part of the money was ever paid.</p>

<p><span class="par">[11]</span> He was, however, not yet wholly 
abandoned. The Lady Mason still continued her care, and directed 
him to be placed at a small grammar-school near St. Alban's, 
where he was called by the name of his nurse, without the least 
intimation that he had a claim to any other.</p>

<p><span class="par">[12]</span> Here he was initiated in 
literature, and passed through several of the classes, with what 
rapidity or what applause cannot now be known. As he always spoke 
with respect of his master, it is probable that the mean rank, in 
which he then appeared, did not hinder his genius from being 
distinguished, or his industry from being rewarded; and if in so 
low a state he obtained distinction and rewards, it is not likely 
that they were gained but by genius and industry.</p>

<p><span class="par">[13]</span> It is very reasonable to 
conjecture that his application was equal to his abilities, 
because his improvement was more than proportioned to the 
opportunities which he enjoyed; nor can it be doubted that if his 
earliest productions had been preserved like those of happier 
students, we might in some have found vigorous sallies of that 
sprightly humour which distinguishes <cite>The Author to be 
let</cite>, and in others strong touches of that ardent 
imagination which painted the solemn scenes of <cite>The 
Wanderer</cite>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[14]</span> While he was thus cultivating 
his genius, his father, the Earl Rivers, was seized with a 
distemper, which in a short time put an end to his life. He had 
frequently inquired after his son, and had always been amused 
with fallacious and evasive answers but, being now in his own 
opinion on his death-bed, he thought it his duty to provide for 
him among his other natural children and therefore demanded a 
positive account of him, with an importunity not to be diverted 
or denied. His mother, who could no longer refuse an answer, 
determined at least to give such as should cut him off for ever 
from that happiness which competence affords, and therefore 
declared that he was dead; which is perhaps the first instance of 
a lie invented by a mother to deprive her son of a provision 
which was designed him by another, and which she could not expect 
herself, though he should lose it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[15]</span> This was therefore an act of 
wickedness which could not be defeated, because it could not be 
suspected: the Earl did not imagine that there could exist in a 
human form a mother that would ruin her son without enriching 
herself; and therefore bestowed upon some other person six 
thousand pounds, which he had in his will bequeathed to 
Savage.</p>

<p><span class="par">[16]</span> The same cruelty which incited 
his mother to intercept this provision which had been intended 
him prompted her in a short time to another project, a project 
worthy of such a disposition. She endeavoured to rid herself from 
the danger of being at any time made known to him, by sending him 
secretly to the American plantations.</p>

<p><span class="par">[17]</span> By whose kindness this scheme 
was counteracted, or by what interposition she was induced to lay 
aside her design, I know not: it is not improbable that the Lady 
Mason might persuade or compel her to desist, or perhaps she 
could not easily find accomplices wicked enough to concur in so 
cruel an action; for it may be conceived that those who had by a 
long gradation of guilt hardened their hearts against the sense 
of common wickedness, would yet be shocked at the design of a 
mother to expose her son to slavery and want, to expose him 
without interest, and without provocation; and Savage might on 
this occasion find protectors and advocates among those who had 
long traded in crimes, and whom compassion had never touched 
before.</p>

<p><span class="par">[18]</span> Being hindered, by whatever 
means, from banishing him into another country, she formed soon 
after a scheme for burying him in poverty and obscurity in his 
own; and, that his station of life, if not the place of his 
residence, might keep him for ever at a distance from her, she 
ordered him to be placed with a shoemaker in Holborn, that, after 
the usual time of trial, he might become his apprentice.</p>

<p><span class="par">[19]</span> It is generally reported that 
this project was for some time successful, and that Savage was 
employed at the awl longer than he was willing to confess; nor 
was it perhaps any great advantage to him that an unexpected 
discovery determined him to quit his occupation.</p>

<p><span class="par">[20]</span> About this time his nurse, who 
had always treated him as her own son, died, and it was natural 
for him to take care of those effects, which by her death were, 
as he imagined, become his own; he therefore went to her house, 
opened her boxes, and examined her papers, among which he found 
some letters written to her by the Lady Mason, which informed him 
of his birth, and the reasons for which it was concealed.</p>

<p><span class="par">[21]</span> He was no longer satisfied with 
the employment which had been allotted him, but thought he had a 
right to share the affluence of his mother; and therefore without 
scruple applied to her as her son, and made use of every art to 
awaken her tenderness and attract her regard. But neither his 
letters, nor the interposition of those friends which his merit 
or his distress procured him, made any impression upon her mind. 
She still resolved to neglect, though she could no longer disown 
him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[22]</span> It was to no purpose that he 
frequently solicited her to admit him to see her; she avoided him 
with the most vigilant precaution, and ordered him to be excluded 
from her house, by whomsoever he might be introduced and what 
reason soever he might give for entering it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[23]</span> Savage was at the same time so 
touched with the discovery of his real mother that it was his 
frequent practice to walk in the dark evenings for several hours 
before her door, in hopes of seeing her as she might come by 
accident to the window, or cross her apartment with a candle in 
her hand.</p>

<p><span class="par">[24]</span> But all his assiduity and 
tenderness were without effect, for he could neither soften her 
heart nor open her hand, and was reduced to the utmost miseries 
of want, while he was endeavouring to awaken the affection of a 
mother. He was therefore obliged to seek some other means of 
support; and, having no profession, became by necessity an 
author.</p>

<p><span class="par">[25]</span> At this time the attention of 
all the literary world was engrossed by the Bangorian 
controversy, which filled the press with pamphlets and the 
coffee-houses with disputants. Of this subject, as most popular, 
he made choice for his first attempt and, without any other 
knowledge of the question than he had casually collected from 
conversation, published a poem against the Bishop.</p>

<p><span class="par">[26]</span> What was the success or merit of 
this performance, I know not; it was probably lost among the 
innumerable pamphlets to which that dispute gave occasion. Mr. 
Savage was himself in a little time ashamed of it, and 
endeavoured to suppress it by destroying all the copies that he 
could collect.</p>

<p><span class="par">[27]</span> He then attempted a more gainful 
kind of writing, and in his eighteenth year offered to the stage 
a comedy borrowed from a Spanish plot, which was refused by the 
players, and was therefore given by him to Mr. Bullock, who, 
having more interest, made some slight alterations, and brought 
it upon the stage under the title of <cite>Woman's a 
Riddle</cite>, but allowed the unhappy author no part of the 
profit.</p>

<p><span class="par">[28]</span> Not discouraged however at his 
repulse, he wrote two years afterwards <cite>Love in a 
Veil</cite>, another comedy, borrowed likewise from the Spanish, 
but with little better success than before; for though it was 
received and acted, yet it appeared so late in the year that the 
author obtained no other advantage from it than the acquaintance 
of Sir Richard Steele and Mr. Wilks, by whom he was pitied, 
caressed, and relieved.</p>

<p><span class="par">[29]</span> Sir Richard Steele, having 
declared in his favour with all the ardour of benevolence which 
constituted his character, promoted his interest with the utmost 
zeal, related his misfortunes, applauded his merit, took all 
opportunities of recommending him, and asserted that &ldquo;the 
inhumanity of his mother had given him a right to find every good 
man his father.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[30]</span> Nor was Mr. Savage admitted to 
his acquaintance only, but to his confidence, of which he 
sometimes related an instance too extraordinary to be omitted, as 
it affords a very just idea of his patron's character.</p>

<p><span class="par">[31]</span> He was once desired by Sir 
Richard, with an air of the utmost importance, to come very early 
to his house the next morning. Mr. Savage came as he had 
promised, found the chariot at the door, and Sir Richard waiting 
for him, and ready to go out. What was intended, and whither they 
were to go, Savage could not conjecture, and was not willing to 
inquire, but immediately seated himself with Sir Richard; the 
coachman was ordered to drive, and they hurried with the utmost 
expedition to Hyde-Park Corner, where they stopped at a petty 
tavern, and retired to a private room. Sir Richard then informed 
him that he intended to publish a pamphlet, and that he had 
desired him to come thither that he might write for him. They 
soon sat down to the work. Sir Richard dictated, and Savage 
wrote, till the dinner that had been ordered was put upon the 
table. Savage was surprised at the meanness of the entertainment, 
and after some hesitation ventured to ask for wine, which Sir 
Richard, not without reluctance, ordered to be brought. They then 
finished their dinner, and proceeded in their pamphlet, which 
they concluded in the afternoon.</p>

<p><span class="par">[32]</span> Mr. Savage then imagined his 
task over, and expected that Sir Richard would call for the 
reckoning, and return home; but his expectations deceived him, 
for Sir Richard told him that he was without money, and that the 
pamphlet must be sold before the dinner could be paid for; and 
Savage was therefore obliged to go and offer their new production 
to sale for two guineas, which with some difficulty he obtained. 
Sir Richard then returned home, having retired that day only to 
avoid his creditors, and composed the pamphlet only to discharge 
his reckoning.</p>

<p><span class="par">[33]</span> Mr. Savage related another fact 
equally uncommon, which, though it has no relation to his life, 
ought to be preserved. Sir Richard Steele having one day invited 
to his house a great number of persons of the first quality, they 
were surprised at the number of liveries which surrounded the 
table; and after dinner, when wine and mirth had set them free 
from the observation of rigid ceremony, one of them inquired of 
Sir Richard how such an expensive train of domestics could be 
consistent with his fortune. Sir Richard very frankly confessed 
that they were fellows of whom he would very willingly be rid. 
And being then asked why he did not discharge them, declared that 
they were bailiffs who had introduced themselves with an 
execution, and whom, since he could not send them away, he had 
thought it convenient to embellish with liveries that they might 
do him credit while they staid.</p>

<p><span class="par">[34]</span> His friends were diverted with 
the expedient, and, by paying the debt, discharged their 
attendance, having obliged Sir Richard to promise that they 
should never again find him graced with a retinue of the same 
kind.</p>

<p><span class="par">[35]</span> Under such a tutor Mr. Savage 
was not likely to learn prudence or frugality; and perhaps many 
of the misfortunes, which the want of those virtues brought upon 
him in the following parts of his life, might be justly imputed 
to so unimproving an example.</p>

<p><span class="par">[36]</span> Nor did the kindness of Sir 
Richard end in common favours. He proposed to have established 
him in some settled scheme of life, and to have contracted a kind 
of alliance with him, by marrying him to a natural daughter, on 
whom he intended to bestow a thousand pounds. But though he was 
always lavish of future bounties, he conducted his affairs in 
such a manner that he was very seldom able to keep his promises 
or execute his own intentions; and, as he was never able to raise 
the sum which he had offered, the marriage was delayed. In the 
mean time he was officiously informed that Mr. Savage had 
ridiculed him; by which he was so much exasperated that he 
withdrew the allowance which he had paid him, and never 
afterwards admitted him to his house.</p>

<p><span class="par">[37]</span> It is not indeed unlikely that 
Savage might by his imprudence expose himself to the malice of a 
tale-bearer; for his patron had many follies, which, as his 
discernment easily discovered, his imagination might sometimes 
incite him to mention too ludicrously. A little knowledge of the 
world is sufficient to discover that such weakness is very 
common, and that there are few who do not sometimes, in the 
wantonness of thoughtless mirth or the heat of transient 
resentment, speak of their friends and benefactors with levity 
and contempt, though in their cooler moments they want neither 
sense of their kindness nor reverence for their virtue. The fault 
therefore of Mr. Savage was rather negligence than ingratitude; 
but Sir Richard must likewise be acquitted of severity, for who 
is there that can patiently bear contempt from one whom he has 
relieved and supported, whose establishment he has laboured, and 
whose interest he has promoted?</p>

<p><span class="par">[38]</span> He was now again abandoned to 
fortune without any other friend than Mr. Wilks, a man who, 
whatever were his abilities or skill as an actor, deserves at 
least to be remembered for his virtues, which are not often to be 
found in the world, and perhaps less often in his profession than 
in others. To be humane, generous, and candid is a very high 
degree of merit in any case, but those qualities deserve still 
greater praise when they are found in that condition which makes 
almost every other man, for whatever reason, contemptuous, 
insolent, petulant, selfish, and brutal.</p>

<p><span class="par">[39]</span> As Mr. Wilks was one of those to 
whom calamity seldom complained without relief, he naturally took 
an unfortunate wit into his protection, and not only assisted him 
in any casual distresses, but continued an equal and steady 
kindness to the time of his death.</p>

<p><span class="par">[40]</span> By his interposition Mr. Savage 
once obtained from his mother fifty pounds, and a promise of one 
hundred and fifty more; but it was the fate of this unhappy man 
that few promises of any advantage to him were performed. His 
mother was infected among others with the general madness of the 
South Sea traffic; and, having been disappointed in her 
expectations, refused to pay what perhaps nothing but the 
prospect of sudden affluence prompted her to promise.</p>

<p><span class="par">[41]</span> Being thus obliged to depend 
upon the friendship of Mr. Wilks, he was consequently an 
assiduous frequenter of the theatres; and in a short time the 
amusements of the stage took such possession of his mind, that he 
never was absent from a play in several years.</p>

<p><span class="par">[42]</span> This constant attendance 
naturally procured him the acquaintance of the players, and, 
among others, of Mrs. Oldfield, who was so much pleased with his 
conversation and touched with his misfortunes, that she allowed 
him a settled pension of fifty pounds a year, which was during 
her life regularly paid.</p>

<p><span class="par">[43]</span> That this act of generosity may 
receive its due praise, and that the good actions of Mrs. 
Oldfield may not be sullied by her general character, it is 
proper to mention what Mr. Savage often declared in the strongest 
terms, that he never saw her alone, or in any other place than 
behind the scenes.</p>

<p><span class="par">[44]</span> At her death he endeavoured to 
shew his gratitude in the most decent manner, by wearing mourning 
as for a mother, but did not celebrate her in elegies, because he 
knew that too great profusion of praise would only have revived 
those faults which his natural equity did not allow him to think 
less, because they were committed by one who favoured him, but of 
which, though his virtue would not endeavour to palliate them, 
his gratitude would not suffer him to prolong the memory, or 
diffuse the censure.</p>

<p><span class="par">[45]</span> In his <cite>Wanderer</cite> he 
has indeed taken an opportunity of mentioning her, but celebrates 
her not for her virtue, but her beauty, an excellence which none 
ever denied her: this is the only encomium with which he has 
rewarded her liberality, and perhaps he has even in this been too 
lavish of his praise. He seems to have thought that never to 
mention his benefactress would have an appearance of ingratitude, 
though to have dedicated any particular performance to her memory 
would have only betrayed an officious partiality that, without 
exalting her character, would have depressed his own.</p>

<p><span class="par">[46]</span> He had sometimes, by the 
kindness of Mr. Wilks, the advantage of a benefit, on which 
occasions he often received uncommon marks of regard and 
compassion; and was once told by the Duke of Dorset that it was 
just to consider him as an injured nobleman, and that, in his 
opinion, the nobility ought to think themselves obliged without 
solicitation to take every opportunity of supporting him by their 
countenance and patronage. But he had generally the mortification 
to hear that the whole interest of his mother was employed to 
frustrate his applications, and that she never left any expedient 
untried by which he might be cut off from the possibility of 
supporting life. The same disposition she endeavoured to diffuse 
among all those over whom nature or fortune gave her any 
influence, and indeed succeeded too well in her design; but could 
not always propagate her effrontery with her cruelty, for some of 
those, whom she incited against him, were ashamed of their own 
conduct, and boasted of that relief which they never gave 
him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[47]</span> In this censure I do not 
indiscriminately involve all his relations; for he has mentioned 
with gratitude the humanity of one lady, whose name I am now 
unable to recollect, and to whom therefore I cannot pay the 
praises which she deserves for having acted well in opposition to 
influence, precept, and example.</p>

<p><span class="par">[48]</span> The punishment which our laws 
inflict upon those parents who murder their infants is well 
known, nor has its justice ever been contested; but if they 
deserve death who destroy a child in its birth, what pains can be 
severe enough for her who forbears to destroy him only to inflict 
sharper miseries upon him; who prolongs his life only to make it 
miserable; and who exposes him, without care and without pity, to 
the malice of oppression, the caprices of chance, and the 
temptations of poverty; who rejoices to see him overwhelmed with 
calamities; and, when his own industry or the charity of others 
has enabled him to rise for a short time above his miseries, 
plunges him again into his former distress?</p>

<p><span class="par">[49]</span> The kindness of his friends not 
affording him any constant supply, and the prospect of improving 
his fortune by enlarging his acquaintance necessarily leading him 
to places of expence, he found it necessary to endeavour once 
more at dramatick poetry, for which he was now better qualified 
by a more extensive knowledge and longer observation. But having 
been unsuccessful in comedy, though rather for want of 
opportunities than genius, he resolved now to try whether he 
should not be more fortunate in exhibiting a tragedy.</p>

<p><span class="par">[50]</span> The story which he chose for the 
subject was that of Sir Thomas Overbury, a story well adapted to 
the stage, though perhaps not far enough removed from the present 
age, to admit properly the fictions necessary to complete the 
plan; for the mind, which naturally loves truth, is always most 
offended with the violation of those truths of which we are most 
certain, and we, of course, conceive those facts most certain 
which approach nearest to our own time.</p>

<p><span class="par">[51]</span> Out of this story he formed a 
tragedy which, if the circumstances in which he wrote it be 
considered, will afford at once an uncommon proof of strength of 
genius and evenness of mind, of a serenity not to be ruffled, and 
an imagination not to be suppressed.</p>

<p><span class="par">[52]</span> During a considerable part of 
the time in which he was employed upon this performance he was 
without lodging, and often without meat; nor had he any other 
conveniences for study than the fields or the street allowed him: 
there he used to walk and form his speeches, and afterwards step 
into a shop, beg for a few moments the use of the pen and ink, 
and write down what he had composed upon paper which he had 
picked up by accident.</p>

<p><span class="par">[53]</span> If the performance of a writer 
thus distressed is not perfect, its faults ought surely to be 
imputed to a cause very different from want of genius, and must 
rather excite pity than provoke censure.</p>

<p><span class="par">[54]</span> But when under these 
discouragements the tragedy was finished, there yet remained the 
labour of introducing it on the stage, an undertaking which to an 
ingenuous mind was in a very high degree vexatious and 
disgusting; for, having little interest or reputation, he was 
obliged to submit himself wholly to the players, and admit, with 
whatever reluctance, the emendations of Mr. Cibber, which he 
always considered as the disgrace of his performance.</p>

<p><span class="par">[55]</span> He had indeed in Mr. Hill 
another critick of a very different class, from whose friendship 
he received great assistance on many occasions, and whom he never 
mentioned but with the utmost tenderness and regard. He had been 
for some time distinguished by him with very particular kindness, 
and on this occasion it was natural to apply to him as an author 
of an established character. He therefore sent this tragedy to 
him, with a short copy of verses, in which he desired his 
correction. Mr. Hill, whose humanity and politeness are generally 
known, readily complied with his request, but as he is remarkable 
for singularity of sentiment and bold experiments in language, 
Mr. Savage did not think his play much improved by his 
innovation, and had even at that time the courage to reject 
several passages which he could not approve; and, what is still 
more laudable, Mr. Hill had the generosity not to resent the 
neglect of his alterations, but wrote the prologue and epilogue, 
in which he touches on the circumstances of the author with great 
tenderness.</p>

<p><span class="par">[56]</span> After all these obstructions and 
compliances he was only able to bring his play upon the stage in 
the summer, when the chief actors had retired and the rest were 
in possession of the house for their own advantage. Among these, 
Mr. Savage was admitted to play the part of Sir Thomas Overbury, 
by which he gained no great reputation; the theatre being a 
province for which nature seemed not to have designed him, for 
neither his voice, look, nor gesture were such as are expected on 
the stage; and he was so much ashamed of having been reduced to 
appear as a player, that he always blotted out his name from the 
list when a copy of his tragedy was to be shown to his 
friends.</p>

<p><span class="par">[57]</span> In the publication of his 
performance he was more successful, for the rays of genius that 
glimmered in it, that glimmered through all the mists which 
poverty and Cibber had been able to spread over it, procured him 
the notice and esteem of many persons eminent for their rank, 
their virtue, and their wit.</p>

<p><span class="par">[58]</span> Of this play, acted, printed, 
and dedicated, the accumulated profits arose to an hundred 
pounds, which he thought at that time a very large sum, having 
been never master of so much before.</p>

<p><span class="par">[59]</span> In the Dedication, for which he 
received ten guineas, there is nothing remarkable. The Preface 
contains a very liberal encomium on the blooming excellences of 
Mr. Theophilus Cibber, which Mr. Savage could not, in the latter 
part of his life, see his friends about to read without snatching 
the play out of their hands. The generosity of Mr. Hill did not 
end on this occasion; for afterwards, when Mr. Savage's 
necessities returned, he encouraged a subscription to a 
<cite>Miscellany of Poems</cite> in a very extraordinary manner, 
by publishing his story in <cite>The Plain Dealer</cite>, with 
some affecting lines, which he asserts to have been written by 
Mr. Savage upon the treatment received by him from his mother, 
but of which he was himself the author, as Mr. Savage afterwards 
declared. These lines, and the paper in which they were inserted, 
had a very powerful effect upon all but his mother, whom, by 
making her cruelty more publick, they only hardened in her 
aversion.</p>

<p><span class="par">[60]</span> Mr. Hill not only promoted the 
subscription to the <cite>Miscellany</cite>, but furnished 
likewise the greatest part of the Poems of which it is composed, 
and particularly <cite>The Happy Man</cite>, which he published 
as a specimen.</p>

<p><span class="par">[61]</span> The subscriptions of those whom 
these papers should influence to patronize merit in distress, 
without any other solicitation, were directed to be left at 
Button's coffee-house; and Mr. Savage going thither a few days 
afterwards, without expectation of any effect from his proposal, 
found to his surprise seventy guineas, which had been sent him in 
consequence of the compassion excited by Mr. Hill's pathetick 
representation.</p>

<p><span class="par">[62]</span> To this <cite>Miscellany</cite> 
he wrote a Preface, in which he gives an account of his mother's 
cruelty in a very uncommon strain of humour, and with a gaiety of 
imagination which the success of his subscription probably 
produced.</p>

<p><span class="par">[63]</span> The Dedication is addressed to 
the Lady Mary Wortley Montague, whom he flatters without reserve, 
and, to confess the truth, with very little art. The same 
observation may be extended to all his Dedications; his 
compliments are constrained and violent, heaped together without 
the grace of order, or the decency of introduction: he seems to 
have written his panegyricks for the perusal only of his patrons, 
and to have imagined that he had no other task than to pamper 
them with praises however gross, and that flattery would make its 
way to the heart, without the assistance of elegance or 
invention.</p>

<p><span class="par">[64]</span> Soon afterwards the death of the 
king furnished a general subject for a poetical contest, in which 
Mr. Savage engaged, and is allowed to have carried the prize of 
honour from his competitors; but I know not whether he gained by 
his performance any other advantage than the increase of his 
reputation, though it must certainly have been with farther views 
that he prevailed upon himself to attempt a species of writing, 
of which all the topicks had been long before exhausted, and 
which was made at once difficult by the multitudes that had 
failed in it, and those that had succeeded.</p>

<p><span class="par">[65]</span> He was now advancing in 
reputation, and, though frequently involved in very distressful 
perplexities, appeared, however, to be gaining upon mankind, when 
both his fame and his life were endangered by an event, of which 
it is not yet determined whether it ought to be mentioned as a 
crime or a calamity.</p>

<p><span class="par">[66]</span> On the 20th of November, 1727, 
Mr. Savage came from Richmond, where he then lodged, that he 
might pursue his studies with less interruption, with an intent 
to discharge another lodging which he had in Westminster, and 
accidentally meeting two gentlemen his acquaintances, whose names 
were Merchant and Gregory, he went in with them to a neighbouring 
coffeehouse, and sat drinking till it was late; it being in no 
time of Mr. Savage's life any part of his character to be the 
first of the company that desired to separate. He would willingly 
have gone to bed in the same house; but there was not room for 
the whole company, and therefore they agreed to ramble about the 
streets, and divert themselves with such amusements as should 
offer themselves till morning.</p>

<p><span class="par">[67]</span> In this walk they happened 
unluckily to discover a light in Robinson's coffee-house, near 
Charing-cross, and therefore went in. Merchant, with some 
rudeness, demanded a room, and was told that there was a good 
fire in the next parlour, which the company were about to leave, 
being then paying their reckoning. Merchant, not satisfied with 
this answer, rushed into the room, and was followed by his 
companions. He then petulantly placed himself between the company 
and the fire, and soon after kicked down the table. This produced 
a quarrel, swords were drawn on both sides, and one Mr. James 
Sinclair was killed. Savage, having wounded likewise a maid that 
held him, forced his way with Merchant out of the house; but 
being intimidated and confused, without resolution either to fly 
or stay, they were taken in a back-court by one of the company 
and some soldiers, whom he had called to his assistance.</p>

<p><span class="par">[68]</span> Being secured and guarded that 
night they were in the morning carried before three justices, who 
committed them to the Gate-house, from whence, upon the death of 
Mr. Sinclair, which happened the same day, they were removed in 
the night to Newgate, where they were, however, treated with some 
distinction, exempted from the ignominy of chains, and confined, 
not among the common criminals, but in the Press-yard.</p>

<p><span class="par">[69]</span> When the day of trial came the 
court was crowded in a very unusual manner, and the public 
appeared to interest itself as in a cause of general concern. The 
witnesses against Mr. Savage and his friends were the woman who 
kept the house, which was a house of ill fame, and her maid, the 
men who were in the room with Mr. Sinclair, and a woman of the 
town, who had been drinking with them, and with whom one of them 
had been seen in bed. They swore in general that Merchant gave 
the provocation, which Savage and Gregory drew their swords to 
justify; that Savage drew first, and that he stabbed Sinclair 
when he was not in a posture of defence, or while Gregory 
commanded his sword; that after he had given the thrust he turned 
pale, and would have retired, but that the maid clung round him, 
and one of the company endeavoured to detain him, from whom he 
broke by cutting the maid on the head, but was afterwards taken 
in a court.</p>

<p><span class="par">[70]</span> There was some difference in 
their depositions; one did not see Savage give the wound, another 
saw it given when Sinclair held his point towards the ground; and 
the woman of the town asserted that she did not see Sinclair's 
sword at all: this difference, however, was very far from 
amounting to inconsistency; but it was sufficient to show that 
the hurry of the dispute was such that it was not easy to 
discover the truth with relation to particular circumstances, and 
that therefore some deductions were to be made from the 
credibility of the testimonies.</p>

<p><span class="par">[71]</span> Sinclair had declared several 
times before his death that he received his wound from Savage; 
nor did Savage at his trial deny the fact, but endeavoured partly 
to extenuate it by urging the suddenness of the whole action, and 
the impossibility of any ill design or premeditated malice, and 
partly to justify it by the necessity of self-defence, and the 
hazard of his own life if he had lost that opportunity of giving 
the thrust: he observed that neither reason nor law obliged a man 
to wait for the blow which was threatened, and which, if he 
should suffer it, he might never be able to return; that it was 
always allowable to prevent an assault, and to preserve life by 
taking away that of the adversary by whom it was endangered.</p>

<p><span class="par">[72]</span> With regard to the violence with 
which he endeavoured to escape, he declared that it was not his 
design to fly from justice or decline a trial, but to avoid the 
expences and severities of a prison, and that he intended to have 
appeared at the bar without compulsion.</p>

<p><span class="par">[73]</span> This defence, which took up more 
than an hour, was heard by the multitude that thronged the court 
with the most attentive and respectful silence: those who thought 
he ought not to be acquitted owned that applause could not be 
refused him; and those who before pitied his misfortunes, now 
reverenced his abilities.</p>

<p><span class="par">[74]</span> The witnesses which appeared 
against him were proved to be persons of characters which did not 
entitle them to much credit: a common strumpet, a woman by whom 
strumpets were entertained, and a man by whom they were 
supported; and the character of Savage was by several persons of 
distinction asserted to be that of a modest inoffensive man, not 
inclined to broils, or to insolence, and who had, to that time, 
been only known for his misfortunes and his wit.</p>

<p><span class="par">[75]</span> Had his audience been his judges 
he had undoubtedly been acquitted; but Sir Francis Page, who was 
then upon the bench, treated him with his usual insolence and 
severity, and when he had summed up the evidence endeavoured to 
exasperate the jury, as Mr. Savage used to relate it, with this 
eloquent harangue:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;Gentlemen of the jury, you are to consider that Mr. 
Savage is a very great man, a much greater man than you or I, 
gentlemen of the jury; that he wears very fine clothes, much 
finer clothes than you or I, gentlemen of the jury; that he has 
abundance of money in his pocket, much more money than you or I, 
gentlemen of the jury; but, gentlemen of the jury, is it not a 
very hard case, gentlemen of the jury, that Mr. Savage should 
therefore kill you or me, gentlemen of the jury?&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[76]</span> Mr. Savage, hearing his defence 
thus misrepresented, and the men who were to decide his fate 
incited against him by invidious comparisons, resolutely asserted 
that his cause was not candidly explained, and began to 
recapitulate what he had before said with regard to his 
condition, and the necessity of endeavouring to escape the 
expences of imprisonment; but the judge, having ordered him to be 
silent, and repeated his orders without effect, commanded that he 
should be taken from the bar by force.</p>

<p><span class="par">[77]</span> The jury then heard the opinion 
of the judge that good characters were of no weight against 
positive evidence, though they might turn the scale where it was 
doubtful; and that though, when two men attack each other, the 
death of either is only manslaughter; but where one is the 
aggressor, as in the case before them, and, in pursuance of his 
first attack, kills the other, the law supposes the action, 
however sudden, to be malicious. They then deliberated upon their 
verdict, and determined that Mr. Savage and Mr. Gregory were 
guilty of murder, and Mr. Merchant, who had no sword, only of 
manslaughter.</p>

<p><span class="par">[78]</span> Thus ended this memorable trial, 
which lasted eight hours. Mr. Savage and Mr. Gregory were 
conducted back to prison, where they were more closely confined, 
and loaded with irons of fifty pounds weight; four days 
afterwards they were sent back to the court to receive sentence, 
on which occasion Mr. Savage made, as far as it could be retained 
in memory, the following speech:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;It is now, my Lord, too late to offer any thing by way 
of defence or vindication, nor can we expect from your Lordships, 
in this court, but the sentence which the law requires you, as 
judges, to pronounce against men of our calamitous condition. 
&mdash; But we are also persuaded that as mere men, and out of 
this seat of rigorous justice, you are susceptive of the tender 
passions, and too humane, not to commiserate the unhappy 
situation of those whom the law sometimes perhaps &mdash; exacts 
&mdash; from you to pronounce upon. No doubt you distinguish 
between offences which arise out of premeditation and a 
disposition habituated to vice or immorality and transgressions, 
which are the unhappy and unforeseen effects of [a] casual 
absence of reason, and sudden impulse of passion: we therefore 
hope you will contribute all you can to an extension of that 
mercy, which the gentlemen of the jury have been pleased to shew 
Mr. Merchant, who (allowing facts as sworn against us by the 
evidence) has led us into this our calamity. I hope this will not 
be construed as if we meant to reflect upon that gentleman, or 
remove any thing from us upon him, or that we repine the more at 
our fate, because he has no participation of it. No, my Lord! For 
my part, I declare nothing could more soften my grief than to be 
without any companion in so great a misfortune.</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[79]</span> Mr. Savage had now no hopes of 
life but from the mercy of the crown, which was very earnestly 
solicited by his friends, and which, with whatever difficulty the 
story may obtain belief, was obstructed only by his mother.</p>

<p><span class="par">[80]</span> To prejudice the Queen against 
him she made use of an incident, which was omitted in the order 
of time, that it might be mentioned together with the purpose 
which it was made to serve. Mr. Savage, when he had discovered 
his birth, had an incessant desire to speak to his mother, who 
always avoided him in publick, and refused him admission into her 
house. One evening walking, as it was his custom, in the street 
that she inhabited, he saw the door of her house by accident 
open; he entered it, and, finding no person in the passage to 
hinder him, went up stairs to salute her. She discovered him 
before he could enter her chamber, alarmed the family with the 
most distressful outcries, and when she had by her screams 
gathered them about her, ordered them to drive out of the house 
that villain, who had forced himself in upon her, and endeavoured 
to murder her. Savage, who had attempted with the most submissive 
tenderness to soften her rage, hearing her utter so detestable an 
accusation, thought it prudent to retire; and, I believe, never 
attempted afterwards to speak to her.</p>

<p><span class="par">[81]</span> But, shocked as he was with her 
falsehood and her cruelty, he imagined that she intended no other 
use of her lie than to set herself free from his embraces and 
solicitations, and was very far from suspecting that she would 
treasure it in her memory as an instrument of future wickedness, 
or that she would endeavour for this fictitious assault to 
deprive him of his life.</p>

<p><span class="par">[82]</span> But when the Queen was solicited 
for his pardon, and informed of the severe treatment which he had 
suffered from his judge, she answered that, however unjustifiable 
might be the manner of his trial, or whatever extenuation the 
action for which he was condemned might admit, she could not 
think that man a proper object of the King's mercy, who had been 
capable of entering his mother's house in the night, with an 
intent to murder her.</p>

<p><span class="par">[83]</span> By whom this atrocious calumny 
had been transmitted to the Queen; whether she that invented had 
the front to relate it; whether she found any one weak enough to 
credit it, or corrupt enough to concur with her in her hateful 
design, I know not: but methods had been taken to persuade the 
Queen so strongly of the truth of it, that she for a long time 
refused to hear any of those who petitioned for his life.</p>

<p><span class="par">[84]</span> Thus had Savage perished by the 
evidence of a bawd, a strumpet, and his mother, had not justice 
and compassion procured him an advocate of rank too great to be 
rejected unheard, and of virtue too eminent to be heard without 
being believed. His merit and his calamities happened to reach 
the ear of the Countess of Hertford, who engaged in his support 
with all the tenderness that is excited by pity, and all the zeal 
which is kindled by generosity; and, demanding an audience of the 
Queen, laid before her the whole series of his mother's cruelty, 
exposed the improbability of an accusation by which he was 
charged with an intent to commit a murder that could produce no 
advantage, and soon convinced her how little his former conduct 
could deserve to be mentioned as a reason for extraordinary 
severity.</p>

<p><span class="par">[85]</span> The interposition of this Lady 
was so successful that he was soon after admitted to bail, and, 
on the 9th of March, 1728, pleaded the King's pardon.</p>

<p><span class="par">[86]</span> It is natural to enquire upon 
what motives his mother could persecute him in a manner so 
outrageous and implacable; for what reason she could employ all 
the arts of malice, and all the snares of calumny, to take away 
the life of her own son, of a son who never injured her, who was 
never supported by her expence, nor obstructed any prospect of 
pleasure or advantage; why she should endeavour to destroy him by 
a lie &mdash; a lie which could not gain credit, but must vanish 
of itself at the first moment of examination, and of which only 
this can be said to make it probable, that it may be observed 
from her conduct that the most execrable crimes are sometimes 
committed without apparent temptation.</p>

<p><span class="par">[87]</span> This mother is still alive, and 
may perhaps even yet, though her malice was so often defeated, 
enjoy the pleasure of reflecting that the life, which she often 
endeavoured to destroy, was at least shortened by her maternal 
offices; that though she could not transport her son to the 
plantations, bury him in the shop of a mechanick, or hasten the 
hand of the publick executioner, she has yet had the satisfaction 
of imbittering all his hours, and forcing him into exigences that 
hurried on his death.</p>

<p><span class="par">[88]</span> It is by no means necessary to 
aggravate the enormity of this woman's conduct, by placing it in 
opposition to that of the Countess of Hertford: no one can fail 
to observe how much more amiable it is to relieve than to 
oppress, and to rescue innocence from destruction than to destroy 
without an injury.</p>

<p><span class="par">[89]</span> Mr. Savage, during his 
imprisonment, his trial, and the time in which he lay under 
sentence of death, behaved with great firmness and equality of 
mind, and confirmed by his fortitude the esteem of those who 
before admired him for his abilities. The peculiar circumstances 
of his life were made more generally known by a short account, 
which was then published, and of which several thousands were in 
a few weeks dispersed over the nation; and the compassion of 
mankind operated so powerfully in his favour that he was enabled 
by frequent presents not only to support himself, but to assist 
Mr. Gregory in prison; and, when he was pardoned and released, he 
found the number of his friends not lessened.</p>

<p><span class="par">[90]</span> The nature of the act for which 
he had been tried was in itself doubtful; of the evidences which 
appeared against him, the character of the man was not 
unexceptionable, that of the woman notoriously infamous: she, 
whose testimony chiefly influenced the jury to condemn him, 
afterwards retracted her assertions. He always himself denied 
that he was drunk, as had been generally reported. Mr. Gregory, 
who is now Collector of Antigua, is said to declare him far less 
criminal than he was imagined, even by some who favoured him; and 
Page himself afterwards confessed that he had treated him with 
uncommon rigour. When all these particulars are rated together, 
perhaps the memory of Savage may not be much sullied by his 
trial.</p>

<p><span class="par">[91]</span> Some time after he had obtained 
his liberty he met in the street the woman that had sworn with so 
much malignity against him. She informed him that she was in 
distress, and, with a degree of confidence not easily attainable, 
desired him to relieve her. He, instead of insulting her misery, 
and taking pleasure in the calamities of one who had brought his 
life into danger, reproved her gently for her perjury; and 
changing the only guinea that he had, divided it equally between 
her and himself.</p>

<p><span class="par">[92]</span> This is an action which in some 
ages would have made a saint, and perhaps in others a hero, and 
which, without any hyperbolical encomiums, must be allowed to be 
an instance of uncommon generosity, an act of complicated virtue; 
by which he at once relieved the poor, corrected the vicious, and 
forgave an enemy; by which he at once remitted the strongest 
provocations, and exercised the most ardent charity.</p>

<p><span class="par">[93]</span> Compassion was indeed the 
distinguishing quality of Savage; he never appeared inclined to 
take advantage of weakness, to attack the defenceless, or to 
press upon the falling: whoever was distressed was certain at 
least of his good wishes; and when he could give no assistance to 
extricate them from misfortunes, he endeavoured to sooth them by 
sympathy and tenderness.</p>

<p><span class="par">[94]</span> But when his heart was not 
softened by the sight of misery he was sometimes obstinate in his 
resentment, and did not quickly lose the remembrance of an 
injury. He always continued to speak with anger of the insolence 
and partiality of Page, and a short time before his death 
revenged it by a satire.</p>

<p><span class="par">[95]</span> It is natural to enquire in what 
terms Mr. Savage spoke of this fatal action, when the danger was 
over, and he was under no necessity of using any art to set his 
conduct in the fairest light. He was not willing to dwell upon 
it; and, if he transiently mentioned it, appeared neither to 
consider himself as a murderer, nor as a man wholly free from the 
guilt of blood. How much and how long he regretted it, appeared 
in a poem which he published many years afterwards. On occasion 
of a copy of verses, in which the failings of good men were 
recounted, and in which the author had endeavoured to illustrate 
his position, that &ldquo;the best may sometimes deviate from 
virtue,&rdquo; by an instance of murder committed by Savage in 
the heat of wine, Savage remarked, that it was no very just 
representation of a good man, to suppose him liable to 
drunkenness, and disposed in his riots to cut throats.</p>

<p><span class="par">[96]</span> He was now indeed at liberty, 
but was as before without any other support than accidental 
favours and uncertain patronage afforded him; sources by which he 
was sometimes very liberally supplied, and which at other times 
were suddenly stopped; so that he spent his life between want and 
plenty, or, what was yet worse, between beggary and extravagance: 
for as whatever he received was the gift of chance, which might 
as well favour him at one time as another, he was tempted to 
squander what he had, because he always hoped to be immediately 
supplied.</p>

<p><span class="par">[97]</span> Another cause of his profusion 
was the absurd kindness of his friends, who at once rewarded and 
enjoyed his abilities, by treating him at taverns and habituating 
him to pleasures which he could not afford to enjoy, and which he 
was not able to deny himself, though he purchased the luxury of a 
single night by the anguish of cold and hunger for a week.</p>

<p><span class="par">[98]</span> The experience of these 
inconveniences determined him to endeavour after some settled 
income, which, having long found submission and intreaties 
fruitless, he attempted to extort from his mother by rougher 
methods. He had now, as he acknowledged, lost that tenderness for 
her which the whole series of her cruelty had not been able 
wholly to repress, till he found, by the efforts which she made 
for his destruction, that she was not content with refusing to 
assist him, and being neutral in his struggles with poverty, but 
was as ready to snatch every opportunity of adding to his 
misfortunes, and that she was to be considered as an enemy 
implacably malicious, whom nothing but his blood could satisfy. 
He therefore threatened to harass her with lampoons, and to 
publish a copious narrative of her conduct, unless she consented 
to purchase an exemption from infamy, by allowing him a 
pension.</p>

<p><span class="par">[99]</span> This expedient proved 
successful. Whether shame still survived though virtue was 
extinct, or whether her relations had more delicacy than herself, 
and imagined that some of the darts which satire might point at 
her would glance upon them, Lord Tyrconnel, whatever were his 
motives, upon his promise to lay aside his design of exposing the 
cruelty of his mother, received him into his family, treated him 
as his equal, and engaged to allow him a pension of two hundred 
pounds a year.</p>

<p><span class="par">[100]</span> This was the golden part of Mr. 
Savage's life; and for some time he had no reason to complain of 
fortune: his appearance was splendid, his expences large, and his 
acquaintance extensive. He was courted by all who endeavoured to 
be thought men of genius, and caressed by all who valued 
themselves upon a refined taste. To admire Mr. Savage was a proof 
of discernment, and to be acquainted with him was a title to 
poetical reputation. His presence was sufficient to make any 
place of publick entertainment popular; and his approbation and 
example constituted the fashion. So powerful is genius when it is 
invested with the glitter of affluence! Men willingly pay to 
fortune that regard which they owe to merit, and are pleased when 
they have an opportunity at once of gratifying their vanity and 
practising their duty.</p>

<p><span class="par">[101]</span> This interval of prosperity 
furnished him with opportunities of enlarging his knowledge of 
human nature by contemplating life from its highest gradations to 
its lowest; and, had he afterwards applied to dramatick poetry, 
he would perhaps not have had many superiors: for as he never 
suffered any scene to pass before his eyes without notice, he had 
treasured in his mind all the different combinations of passions 
and the innumerable mixtures of vice and virtue, which 
distinguish one character from another; and, as his conception 
was strong, his expressions were clear, he easily received 
impressions from objects, and very forcibly transmitted them to 
others.</p>

<p><span class="par">[102]</span> Of his exact observations on 
human life he has left a proof which would do honour to the 
greatest names, in a small pamphlet called <cite>The Author to be 
let</cite>, where he introduces Iscariot Hackney, a prostitute 
scribbler, giving an account of his birth, his education, his 
disposition and morals, habits of life, and maxims of conduct. In 
the introduction are related many secret histories of the petty 
writers of that time, but sometimes mixed with ungenerous 
reflections on their birth, their circumstances, or those of 
their relations; nor can it be denied that some passages are such 
as Iscariot Hackney might himself have produced.</p>

<p><span class="par">[103]</span> He was accused likewise of 
living in an appearance of friendship with some whom he 
satirised, and of making use of the confidence which he gained by 
a seeming kindness to discover failings and expose them: it must 
be confessed that Mr. Savage's esteem was no very certain 
possession, and that he would lampoon at one time those whom he 
had praised at another.</p>

<p><span class="par">[104]</span> It may be alleged that the same 
man may change his principles, and that he, who was once 
deservedly commended, may be afterwards satirised with equal 
justice, or that the poet was dazzled with the appearance of 
virtue, and found the man whom he had celebrated, when he had an 
opportunity of examining him more narrowly, unworthy of the 
panegyrick which he had too hastily bestowed; and that, as a 
false satire ought to be recanted, for the sake of him whose 
reputation may be injured, false praise ought likewise to be 
obviated, lest the distinction between vice and virtue should be 
lost, lest a bad man should be trusted upon the credit of his 
encomiast, or lest others should endeavour to obtain the like 
praises by the same means.</p>

<p><span class="par">[105]</span> But though these excuses may be 
often plausible and sometimes just, they are very seldom 
satisfactory to mankind, and the writer who is not constant to 
his subject, quickly sinks into contempt, his satire loses its 
force, and his panegyrick its value, and he is only considered at 
one time as a flatterer, and as a calumniator at another.</p>

<p><span class="par">[106]</span> To avoid these imputations it 
is only necessary to follow the rules of virtue, and to preserve 
an unvaried regard to truth. For though it is undoubtedly 
possible that a man, however cautious, may be sometimes deceived 
by an artful appearance of virtue, or by false evidences of 
guilt, such errors will not be frequent, and it will be allowed 
that the name of an author would never have been made 
contemptible had no man ever said what he did not think, or 
misled others but when he was himself deceived</p>

<p><span class="par">[107]</span> <cite>The Author to be 
let</cite> was first published in a single pamphlet, and 
afterwards inserted in a collection of pieces relating to 
<cite>The Dunciad</cite>, which were addressed by Mr. Savage to 
the Earl of Middlesex, in a dedication which he was prevailed 
upon to sign, though he did not write it, and in which there are 
some positions that the true author would perhaps not have 
published under his own name, and on which Mr. Savage afterwards 
reflected with no great satisfaction. The enumeration of the bad 
effects of &ldquo;the uncontrouled freedom of the press,&rdquo; 
and the assertion that the &ldquo;liberties taken by the writers 
of Journals with their superiors were exorbitant and 
unjustifiable,&rdquo; very ill became men who have themselves not 
always shewn the exactest regard to the laws of subordination in 
their writings, and who have often satirised those that at least 
thought themselves their superiors, as they were eminent for 
their hereditary rank and employed in the highest offices of the 
kingdom. But this is only an instance of that partiality which 
almost every man indulges with regard, to himself: the liberty of 
the press is a blessing when we are inclined to write against 
others, and a calamity when we find ourselves overborne by the 
multitude of our assailants; as the power of the crown is always 
thought too great by those who suffer by its influence, and too 
little by those in whose favour it is exerted; and a standing 
army is generally accounted necessary by those who command, and 
dangerous and oppressive by those who support it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[108]</span> Mr. Savage was likewise very 
far from believing that the letters annexed to each species of 
bad poets in <cite>The Bathos</cite> were, as he was directed to 
assert, &ldquo;set down at random,&rdquo; for when he was charged 
by one of his friends with putting his name to such an 
improbability he had no other answer to make than that &ldquo;he 
did not think of it&rdquo;; and his friend had too much 
tenderness to reply that next to the crime of writing contrary to 
what he thought, was that of writing without thinking.</p>

<p><span class="par">[109]</span> After having remarked what is 
false in his dedication it is proper that I observe the 
impartiality which I recommend, by declaring what Savage 
asserted, that the account of the circumstances which attended 
the publication of <cite>The Dunciad</cite>, however strange and 
improbable, was exactly true.</p>

<p><span class="par">[110]</span> The publication of this piece 
at this time raised Mr. Savage a great number of enemies among 
those that were attacked by Mr. Pope, with whom he was considered 
as a kind of confederate, and whom he was suspected of supplying 
with private intelligence and secret incidents: so that the 
ignominy of an informer was added to the terror of a 
satirist.</p>

<p><span class="par">[111]</span> That he was not altogether free 
from literary hypocrisy, and that he sometimes spoke one thing 
and wrote another, cannot be denied; because he himself confessed 
that, when he lived in great familiarity with Dennis, he wrote an 
epigram against him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[112]</span> Mr. Savage, however, set all 
the malice of all the pigmy writers at defiance, and thought the 
friendship of Mr. Pope cheaply purchased by being exposed to 
their censure and their hatred; nor had he any reason to repent 
of the preference, for he found Mr. Pope a steady and unalienable 
friend almost to the end of his life.</p>

<p><span class="par">[113]</span> About this time, 
notwithstanding his avowed neutrality with regard to party, he 
published a panegyrick on Sir Robert Walpole, for which he was 
rewarded by him with twenty guineas, a sum not very large, if 
either the excellence of the performance or the affluence of the 
patron be considered; but greater than he afterwards obtained 
from a person of yet higher rank, and more desirous in appearance 
of being distinguished as a patron of literature.</p>

<p><span class="par">[114]</span> As he was very far from 
approving the conduct of Sir Robert Walpole, and in conversation 
mentioned him sometimes with acrimony, and generally with 
contempt; as he was one of those who were always zealous in their 
assertions of the justice of the late opposition, jealous of the 
rights of the people, and alarmed by the long-continued triumph 
of the court; it was natural to ask him what could induce him to 
employ his poetry in praise of that man who was, in his opinion, 
an enemy to liberty, and an oppressor of his country? He alleged 
that he was then dependent upon the Lord Tyrconnel, who was an 
implicit follower of the ministry; and that being enjoined by 
him, not without menaces, to write in praise of his leader, he 
had not resolution sufficient to sacrifice the pleasure of 
affluence to that of integrity.</p>

<p><span class="par">[115]</span> On this, and on many other 
occasions, he was ready to lament the misery of living at the 
tables of other men, which was his fate from the beginning to the 
end of his life; for I know not whether he ever had, for three 
months together, a settled habitation, in which he could claim a 
right of residence.</p>

<p><span class="par">[116]</span> To this unhappy state it is 
just to impute much of the inconstancy of his conduct; for though 
a readiness to comply with the inclination of others was no part 
of his natural character, yet he was sometimes obliged to relax 
his obstinacy, and submit his own judgement, and even his virtue, 
to the government of those by whom he was supported; so that if 
his miseries were sometimes the consequences of his faults, he 
ought not yet to be wholly excluded from compassion, because his 
faults were very often the effects of his misfortunes.</p>

<p><span class="par">[117]</span> In this gay period of his life, 
while he was surrounded by affluence and pleasure, he published 
<cite>The Wanderer</cite>, a moral poem, of which the design is 
comprised in these lines:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;I fly all public care, all venal strife,<br>
To try the still compar'd with active life;<br>
To prove, by these the sons of men may owe<br>
The fruits of bliss to bursting clouds of woe;<br>
That ev'n calamity, by thought refin'd,<br>
Inspirits and adorns the thinking mind.&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[118]</span> And more distinctly in the 
following passage:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;By woe, the soul to daring action swells;<br>
By woe, in plaintless patience it excels;<br>
From patience, prudent clear experience springs,<br>
And traces knowledge thro' the course of things!<br>
Thence hope is form'd, thence fortitude, success,<br>
Renown: &mdash; whate'er men covet and caress.&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[119]</span> This performance was always 
considered by himself as his master-piece; and Mr. Pope, when he 
asked his opinion of it, told him that he read it once over, and 
was not displeased with it, that it gave him more pleasure at the 
second perusal, and delighted him still more at the third.</p>

<p><span class="par">[120]</span> It has been generally objected 
to <cite>The Wanderer</cite> that the disposition of the parts is 
irregular; that the design is obscure, and the plan perplexed; 
that the images, however beautiful, succeed each other without 
order; and that the whole performance is not so much a regular 
fabrick as a heap of shining materials thrown together by 
accident, which strikes rather with the solemn magnificence of a 
stupendous ruin than the elegant grandeur of a finished pile.</p>

<p><span class="par">[121]</span> This criticism is universal, 
and therefore it is reasonable to believe it at least in a great 
degree just; but Mr. Savage was always of a contrary opinion, and 
thought his drift could only be missed by negligence or 
stupidity, and that the whole plan was regular, and the parts 
distinct.</p>

<p><span class="par">[122]</span> It was never denied to abound 
with strong representations of nature, and just observations upon 
life; and it may easily be observed that most of his pictures 
have an evident tendency to illustrate his first great position, 
&ldquo;that good is the consequence of evil.&rdquo; The sun that 
burns up the mountains, fructifies the vales; the deluge that 
rushes down the broken rocks with dreadful impetuosity, is 
separated into purling brooks; and the rage of the hurricane 
purifies the air.</p>

<p><span class="par">[123]</span> Even in this poem he has not 
been able to forbear one touch upon the cruelty of his mother, 
which, though remarkably delicate and tender, is a proof how deep 
an impression it had upon his mind.</p>

<p><span class="par">[124]</span> This must be at least 
acknowledged, which ought to be thought equivalent to many other 
excellences, that this poem can promote no other purposes than 
those of virtue, and that it is written with a very strong sense 
of the efficacy of religion.</p>

<p><span class="par">[125]</span> But my province is rather to 
give the history of Mr. Savage's performances than to display 
their beauties, or to obviate the criticisms which they have 
occasioned; and therefore I shall not dwell upon the particular 
passages which deserve applause: I shall neither shew the 
excellence of his description, nor expatiate on the terrifick 
portrait of suicide, nor point out the artful touches by which he 
has distinguished the intellectual features of the rebels, who 
suffered death in his last canto. It is, however proper to 
observe that Mr. Savage always declared the characters wholly 
fictitious, and without the least allusion to any real persons or 
actions.</p>

<p><span class="par">[126]</span> From a poem so diligently 
laboured, and so successfully finished, it might be reasonably 
expected that he should have gained considerable advantage; nor 
can it, without some degree of indignation and concern, be told 
that he sold the copy for ten guineas, of which he afterwards 
returned two, that the two last sheets of the work might be 
reprinted, of which he had in his absence intrusted the 
correction to a friend, who was too indolent to perform it with 
accuracy.</p>

<p><span class="par">[127]</span> A superstitious regard to the 
correction of his sheets was one of Mr. Savage's peculiarities: 
he often altered, revised, recurred to his first reading or 
punctuation, and again adopted the alteration; he was dubious and 
irresolute without end, as on a question of the last importance, 
and at last was seldom satisfied: the intrusion or omission of a 
comma was sufficient to discompose him, and he would lament an 
error of a single letter as a heavy calamity. In one of his 
letters relating to an impression of some verses, he remarks that 
he had, with regard to the correction of the proof, &ldquo;a 
spell upon him&rdquo;; and indeed the anxiety with which he dwelt 
upon the minutest and most trifling niceties deserved no other 
name than that of fascination.</p>

<p><span class="par">[128]</span> That he sold so valuable a 
performance for so small a price, was not to be imputed either to 
necessity, by which the learned and ingenious are often obliged 
to submit to very hard conditions, or to avarice, by which the 
booksellers are frequently incited to oppress that genius by 
which they are supported; but to that intemperate desire of 
pleasure and habitual slavery to his passions, which involved him 
in many perplexities. He happened at that time to be engaged in 
the pursuit of some trifling gratification, and, being without 
money for the present occasion, sold his poem to the first 
bidder, and perhaps for the first price that was proposed, and 
would probably have been content with less, if less had been 
offered him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[129]</span> This poem was addressed to the 
Lord Tyrconnel, not only in the first lines, but in a formal 
dedication filled with the highest strains of panegyrick and the 
warmest professions of gratitude, but by no means remarkable for 
delicacy of connection or elegance of style.</p>

<p><span class="par">[130]</span> These praises in a short time 
he found himself inclined to retract, being discarded by the man 
on whom he had bestowed them, and whom he then immediately 
discovered not to have deserved them. Of this quarrel, which 
every day made more bitter, Lord Tyrconnel and Mr. Savage 
assigned very different reasons, which might perhaps all in 
reality concur, though they were not all convenient to be alleged 
by either party. Lord Tyrconnel affirmed that it was the constant 
practice of Mr. Savage to enter a tavern with any company that 
proposed it, drink the most expensive wines with great profusion, 
and when the reckoning was demanded to be without money. If, as 
it often happened, his company were willing to defray his part, 
the affair ended, without any ill consequences; but, if they were 
refractory, and expected that the wine should be paid for by him 
that drank it, his method of composition was to take them with 
him to his own apartment, assume the government of the house, and 
order the butler in an imperious manner to set the best wine in 
the cellar before his company, who often drank till they forgot 
the respect due to the house in which they were entertained, 
indulged themselves in the utmost extravagance of merriment, 
practised the most licentious frolicks and committed all the 
outrages of drunkenness</p>

<p><span class="par">[131]</span> Nor was this the only charge 
which Lord Tyrconnel brought against him. Having given him a 
collection of valuable books, stamped with his own arms, he had 
the mortification to see them in a short time exposed to sale 
upon the stalls, it being usual with Mr. Savage, when he wanted a 
small sum, to take his books to the pawnbroker.</p>

<p><span class="par">[132]</span> Whoever was acquainted with Mr. 
Savage easily credited both these accusations: for, having been 
obliged, from his first entrance into the world to subsist upon 
expedients, affluence was not able to exalt him above them; and 
so much was he delighted with wine and conversation, and so long 
had he been accustomed to live by chance, that he would at any 
time go to the tavern without scruple, and trust for the 
reckoning to the liberality of his company, and frequently of 
company to whom he was very little known. This conduct indeed 
very seldom drew upon him those inconveniences that might be 
feared by any other person; for his conversation was so 
entertaining, and his address so pleasing, that few thought the 
pleasure which they received from him dearly purchased by paying 
for his wine. It was his peculiar happiness that he scarcely ever 
found a stranger whom he did not leave a friend; but it must 
likewise be added that he had not often a friend long, without 
obliging him to become a stranger.</p>

<p><span class="par">[133]</span> Mr. Savage, on the other hand, 
declared that Lord Tyrconnel quarrelled with him, because he 
would substract from his own luxury and extravagance what he had 
promised to allow him, and that his resentment was only a plea 
for the violation of his promise. He asserted that he had done 
nothing that ought to exclude him from that subsistence which he 
thought not so much a favour as a debt, since it was offered him 
upon conditions which he had never broken; and that his only 
fault was that he could not be supported with nothing.</p>

<p><span class="par">[134]</span> He acknowledged that Lord 
Tyrconnel often exhorted him to regulate his method of life, and 
not to spend all his nights in taverns, and that he appeared very 
desirous that he would pass those hours with him which he so 
freely bestowed upon others. This demand Mr. Savage considered as 
a censure of his conduct, which he could never patiently bear, 
and which, in the latter and cooler part of his life, was so 
offensive to him, that he declared it as his resolution &ldquo;to 
spurn that friend who should presume to dictate to him&rdquo;; 
and it is not likely that in his earlier years he received 
admonitions with more calmness.</p>

<p><span class="par">[135]</span> He was likewise inclined to 
resent such expectations as tending to infringe his liberty, of 
which he was very jealous when it was necessary to the 
gratification of his passions; and declared that the request was 
still more unreasonable, as the company to which he was to have 
been confined was insupportably disagreeable. This assertion 
affords another instance of that inconsistency of his writings 
with his conversation, which was so often to be observed. He 
forgot how lavishly he had, in his Dedication to <cite>The 
Wanderer</cite>, extolled the delicacy and penetration, the 
humanity and generosity, the candour and politeness of the man, 
whom, when he no longer loved him, he declared to be a wretch 
without understanding, without good-nature, and without justice; 
of whose name he thought himself obliged to leave no trace in any 
future edition of his writings, and accordingly blotted it out of 
that copy of <cite>The Wanderer</cite> which was in his 
hands.</p>

<p><span class="par">[136]</span> During his continuance with the 
Lord Tyrconnel he wrote <cite>The Triumph of Health and 
Mirth</cite>, on the recovery of Lady Tyrconnel from a 
languishing illness. This performance is remarkable not only for 
the gaiety of the ideas and the melody of the numbers, but for 
the agreeable fiction upon which it is formed. Mirth overwhelmed 
with sorrow for the sickness of her favourite, takes a flight in 
quest of her sister Health, whom she finds reclined upon the brow 
of a lofty mountain amidst the fragrance of perpetual spring, 
with the breezes of the morning sporting about her. Being 
solicited by her sister Mirth she readily promises her 
assistance, flies away in a cloud, and impregnates the waters of 
Bath with new virtues, by which the sickness of Belinda is 
relieved.</p>

<p><span class="par">[137]</span> As the reputation of his 
abilities, the particular circumstances of his birth and life, 
the splendour of his appearance, and the distinction which was 
for some time paid him by Lord Tyrconnel intitled him to 
familiarity with persons of higher rank than those to whose 
conversation he had been before admitted, he did not fail to 
gratify that curiosity which induced him to take a nearer view of 
those whom their birth, their employments, or their fortunes, 
necessarily place at a distance from the greatest part of 
mankind, and to examine whether their merit was magnified or 
diminished by the medium through which it was contemplated; 
whether the splendour with which they dazzled their admirers was 
inherent in themselves, or only reflected on them by the objects 
that surrounded them; and whether great men were selected for 
high stations, or high stations made great men.</p>

<p><span class="par">[138]</span> For this purpose he took all 
opportunities of conversing familiarly with those who were most 
conspicuous at that time for their power or their influence; he 
watched their looser moments and examined their domestick 
behaviour with that acuteness which nature had given him, and 
which the uncommon variety of his life had contributed to 
increase, and that inquisitiveness which must always be produced 
in a vigorous mind by an absolute freedom from all pressing or 
domestick engagements. His discernment was quick, and therefore 
he soon found in every person and in every affair something that 
deserved attention: he was supported by others without any care 
for himself, and was therefore at leisure to pursue his 
observations.</p>

<p><span class="par">[139]</span> More circumstances to 
constitute a critick on human life could not easily concur; nor 
indeed could any man, who assumed from accidental advantages more 
praise than he could justly claim from his real merit, admit an 
acquaintance more dangerous than that of Savage: of whom likewise 
it must be confessed that abilities really exalted above the 
common level, or virtue refined from passion, or proof against 
corruption, could not easily find an abler judge or a warmer 
advocate.</p>

<p><span class="par">[140]</span> What was the result of Mr. 
Savage's inquiry, though he was not much accustomed to conceal 
his discoveries, it may not be entirely safe to relate, because 
the persons whose characters he criticised are powerful; and 
power and resentment are seldom strangers: nor would it perhaps 
be wholly just, because what he asserted in conversation might, 
though true in general, be heightened by some momentary ardour of 
imagination, and, as it can, be delivered only from memory, may 
be imperfectly represented; so that the picture at first 
aggravated and then unskilfully copied may be justly suspected to 
retain no great resemblance of the original.</p>

<p><span class="par">[141]</span> It may, however, be observed 
that he did not appear to have formed very elevated ideas of 
those to whom the administration of affairs or the conduct of 
parties has been intrusted; who have been considered as the 
advocates of the crown, or the guardians of the people; and who 
have obtained the most implicit confidence and the loudest 
applauses. Of one particular person, who has been at one time so 
popular as to be generally esteemed, and at another so formidable 
as to be universally detested, he observed that his acquisitions 
had been small or that his capacity was narrow, and that the 
whole range of his mind was from obscenity to politicks, and from 
politicks to obscenity.</p>

<p><span class="par">[142]</span> But the opportunity of 
indulging his speculations on great characters was now at an end. 
He was banished from the table of Lord Tyrconnel, and turned 
again adrift upon the world, without prospect of finding quickly 
any other harbour. As prudence was not one of the virtues by 
which he was distinguished he had made no provision against a 
misfortune like this. And though it is not to be imagined but 
that the separation must for some time have been preceded by 
coldness, peevishness, or neglect, though it was undoubtedly the 
consequence of accumulated provocations on both sides; yet every 
one that knew Savage will readily believe that to him it was 
sudden as a stroke of thunder that, though he might have 
transiently suspected it, he had never suffered any thought so 
unpleasing to sink into his mind, but that he had driven it away 
by amusements, or dreams of future felicity and affluence, and 
had never taken any measures by which he might prevent a 
precipitation from plenty to indigence.</p>

<p><span class="par">[143]</span> This quarrel and separation, 
and the difficulties to which Mr. Savage was exposed by them, 
were soon known both to his friends and enemies; nor was it long 
before he perceived, from the behaviour of both, how much is 
added to the lustre of genius by the ornaments of wealth.</p>

<p><span class="par">[144]</span> His condition did not appear to 
excite much compassion; for he had not always been careful to use 
the advantages he enjoyed with that moderation which ought to 
have been with more than usual caution preserved by him, who 
knew, if he had reflected, that he was only a dependant on the 
bounty of another, whom he could expect to support him no longer 
than he endeavoured to preserve his favour by complying with his 
inclinations, and whom he nevertheless set at defiance, and was 
continually irritating by negligence or encroachments.</p>

<p><span class="par">[145]</span> Examples need not be sought at 
any great distance to prove that superiority of fortune has a 
natural tendency to kindle pride, and that pride seldom fails to 
exert itself in contempt and insult; and if this is often the 
effect of hereditary wealth, and of honours enjoyed only by the 
merit of others, it is some extenuation of any indecent triumphs 
to which this unhappy man may have been betrayed, that his 
prosperity was heightened by the force of novelty, and made more 
intoxicating by a sense of the misery in which he had so long 
languished, and perhaps of the insults which he had formerly 
borne, and which he might now think himself entitled to revenge. 
It is too common for those who have unjustly suffered pain to 
inflict it likewise in their turn with the same injustice, and to 
imagine that they have a right to treat others as they have 
themselves been treated.</p>

<p><span class="par">[146]</span> That Mr. Savage was too much 
elevated by any good fortune is generally known; and some 
passages of his Introduction to <cite>The Author to be let</cite> 
sufficiently shew that he did not wholly refrain from such 
satire, as he afterwards thought very unjust when he was exposed 
to it himself; for when he was afterwards ridiculed in the 
character of a distressed poet, he very easily discovered that 
distress was not a proper subject for merriment or topick of 
invective. He was then able to discern that, if misery be the 
effect of virtue, it ought to be reverenced; if of ill-fortune, 
to be pitied; and if of vice, not to be insulted, because it is 
perhaps itself a punishment adequate to the crime by which it was 
produced. And the humanity of that man can deserve no panegyrick 
who is capable of reproaching a criminal in the hands of the 
executioner.</p>

<p><span class="par">[147]</span> But these reflections, though 
they readily occurred to him in the first and last parts of his 
life, were, I am afraid, for a long time forgotten; at least they 
were, like many other maxims, treasured up in his mind rather for 
shew than use, and operated very little upon his conduct, however 
elegantly he might sometimes explain, or however forcibly he 
might inculcate, them.</p>

<p><span class="par">[148]</span> His degradation therefore from 
the condition which he had enjoyed with such wanton 
thoughtlessness was considered by many as an occasion of triumph. 
Those who had before paid their court to him without success, 
soon returned the contempt which they had suffered; and they who 
had received favours from him, for of such favours as he could 
bestow he was very liberal, did not always remember them. So much 
more certain are the effects of resentment than of gratitude: it 
is not only to many more pleasing to recollect those faults which 
place others below them, than those virtues by which they are 
themselves comparatively depressed, but it is likewise more easy 
to neglect, than to recompense; and though there are few who will 
practise a laborious virtue, there will never be wanting 
multitudes that will indulge an easy vice.</p>

<p><span class="par">[149]</span> Savage, however, was very 
little disturbed at the marks of contempt which his ill-fortune 
brought upon him from those whom he never esteemed, and with whom 
he never considered himself as levelled by any calamities; and 
though it was not without some uneasiness that he saw some, whose 
friendship he valued, change their behaviour, he yet observed 
their coldness without much emotion, considered them as the 
slaves of fortune and the worshippers of prosperity, and was more 
inclined to despise them than to lament himself.</p>

<p><span class="par">[150]</span> It does not appear that, after 
this return of his wants, he found mankind equally favourable to 
him as at his first appearance in the world. His story, though in 
reality not less melancholy, was less affecting, because it was 
no longer new; it therefore procured him no new friends; and 
those that had formerly relieved him thought they might now 
consign him to others. He was now likewise considered by many 
rather as criminal than as unhappy; for the friends of Lord 
Tyrconnel and of his mother were sufficiently industrious to 
publish his weaknesses, which were indeed very numerous, and 
nothing was forgotten that might make him either hateful or 
ridiculous.</p>

<p><span class="par">[151]</span> It cannot but be imagined that 
such representations of his faults must make great numbers less 
sensible of his distress; many, who had only an opportunity to 
hear one part, made no scruple to propagate the account which 
they received; many assisted their circulation from malice or 
revenge; and perhaps many pretended to credit them, that they 
might with a better grace withdraw their regard or withhold their 
assistance.</p>

<p><span class="par">[152]</span> Savage, however, was not one of 
those who suffered himself to be injured without resistance, nor 
was less diligent in exposing the faults of Lord Tyrconnel, over 
whom he obtained at least this advantage, that he drove him first 
to the practice of outrage and violence; for he was so much 
provoked by the wit and virulence of Savage that he came with a 
number of attendants, that did no honour to his courage, to beat 
him at a coffee-house. But it happened that he had left the place 
a few minutes, and his lordship had without danger the pleasure 
of boasting how he would have treated him. Mr. Savage went next 
day to repay his visit at his own house, but was prevailed on by 
his domesticks to retire without insisting upon seeing him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[153]</span> Lord Tyrconnel was accused by 
Mr. Savage of some actions which scarcely any provocations will 
be thought sufficient to justify; such as seizing what he had in 
his lodgings, and other instances of wanton cruelty, by which he 
increased the distress of Savage without any advantage to 
himself.</p>

<p><span class="par">[154]</span> These mutual accusations were 
retorted on both sides for many years with the utmost degree of 
virulence and rage, and time seemed rather to augment than 
diminish their resentment. That the anger of Mr. Savage should be 
kept alive is not strange, because he felt every day the 
consequences of the quarrel; but it might reasonably have been 
hoped that Lord Tyrconnel might have relented, and at length have 
forgot those provocations, which, however they might have once 
inflamed him, had not in reality much hurt him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[155]</span> The spirit of Mr. Savage indeed 
never suffered him to solicit a reconciliation; he returned 
reproach for reproach, and insult for insult: his superiority of 
wit supplied the disadvantages of his fortune, and enabled him to 
form a party, and prejudice great numbers in his favour.</p>

<p><span class="par">[156]</span> But though this might be some 
gratification of his vanity it afforded very little relief to his 
necessities; and he was very frequently reduced to uncommon 
hardships, of which, however, he never made any mean or 
importunate complaints, being formed rather to bear misery with 
fortitude than enjoy prosperity with moderation.</p>

<p><span class="par">[157]</span> He now thought himself again at 
liberty to expose the cruelty of his mother and therefore, I 
believe, about this time published <cite>The Bastard</cite>, a 
poem remarkable for the vivacious sallies of thought in the 
beginning, where he makes a pompous enumeration of the imaginary 
advantages of base birth; and the pathetick sentiments at the 
end, where he recounts the real calamities which he suffered by 
the crime of his parents.</p>

<p><span class="par">[158]</span> The vigour and spirit of the 
verses, the peculiar circumstances of the author, the novelty of 
the subject, and the notoriety of the story to which the 
allusions are made, procured this performance a very favourable 
reception; great numbers were immediately dispersed, and editions 
were multiplied with unusual rapidity.</p>

<p><span class="par">[159]</span> One circumstance attended the 
publication, which Savage used to relate with great satisfaction. 
His mother, to whom the poem was &ldquo;with due reverence&rdquo; 
inscribed, happened then to be at Bath, where she could not 
conveniently retire from censure, or conceal herself from 
observation; and no sooner did the reputation of the poem begin 
to spread than she heard it repeated in all places of concourse; 
nor could she enter the assembly-rooms or cross the walks without 
being saluted with some lines from <cite>The Bastard</cite>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[160]</span> This was perhaps the first time 
that ever she discovered a sense of shame, and on this occasion 
the power of wit was very conspicuous; the wretch who had without 
scruple proclaimed herself an adulteress, and who had first 
endeavoured to starve her son, then to transport him, and 
afterwards to hang him, was not able to bear the representation 
of her own conduct, but fled from reproach, though she felt no 
pain from guilt, and left Bath with the utmost haste to shelter 
herself among the crowds of London.</p>

<p><span class="par">[161]</span> Thus Savage had the 
satisfaction of finding that, though he could not reform his 
mother, he could punish her, and that he did not always suffer 
alone.</p>

<p><span class="par">[162]</span> The pleasure which he received 
from this increase of his poetical reputation was sufficient for 
some time to overbalance the miseries of want, which this 
performance did not much alleviate; for it was sold for a very 
trivial sum to a bookseller, who, though the success was so 
uncommon that five impressions were sold, of which many were 
undoubtedly very numerous, had not generosity sufficient to admit 
the unhappy writer to any part of the profit.</p>

<p><span class="par">[163]</span> The sale of this poem was 
always mentioned by Savage with the utmost elevation of heart, 
and referred to by him as an incontestable proof of a general 
acknowledgement of his abilities. It was indeed the only 
production of which he could justly boast a general 
reception.</p>

<p><span class="par">[164]</span> But though he did not lose the 
opportunity which success gave him, of setting a high rate on his 
abilities, but paid due deference to the suffrages of mankind 
when they were given in his favour, he did not suffer his esteem 
of himself to depend upon others, nor found any thing sacred in 
the voice of the people when they were inclined to censure him; 
he then readily shewed the folly of expecting that the publick 
should judge right, observed how slowly poetical merit had often 
forced its way into the world: he contented himself with the 
applause of men of judgement, and was somewhat disposed to 
exclude all those from the character of men of judgement who did 
not applaud him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[165]</span> But he was at other times more 
favourable to mankind than to think them blind to the beauties of 
his works, and imputed the slowness of their sale to other 
causes; either they were published at a time when the town was 
empty, or when the attention of the publick was engrossed by some 
struggle in the parliament, or some other object of general 
concern; or they were by the neglect of the publisher not 
diligently dispersed, or by his avarice not advertised with 
sufficient frequency. Address, or industry, or liberality, was 
always wanting; and the blame was laid rather on any person than 
the author.</p>

<p><span class="par">[166]</span> By arts like these, arts which 
every man practises in some degree, and to which too much of the 
little tranquillity of life is to be ascribed, Savage was always 
able to live at peace with himself. Had he indeed only made use 
of these expedients to alleviate the loss or want of fortune or 
reputation, or any other advantages, which it is not in man's 
power to bestow upon himself, they might have been justly 
mentioned as instances of a philosophical mind, and very properly 
proposed to the imitation of multitudes, who, for want of 
diverting their imaginations with the same dexterity, languish 
under afflictions which might be easily removed.</p>

<p><span class="par">[167]</span> It were doubtless to be wished 
that truth and reason were universally prevalent; that every 
thing were esteemed according to its real value; and that men 
would secure themselves from being disappointed in their 
endeavours after happiness, by placing it only in virtue, which 
is always to be obtained: but if adventitious and foreign 
pleasures must be pursued it would be perhaps of some benefit, 
since that pursuit must frequently be fruitless, if the practice 
of Savage could be taught that folly might be an antidote to 
folly, and one fallacy be obviated by another.</p>

<p><span class="par">[168]</span> But the danger of this pleasing 
intoxication must not be concealed; nor indeed can any one, after 
having observed the life of Savage, need to be cautioned against 
it. By imputing none of his miseries to himself he continued to 
act upon the same principles, and to follow the same path; was 
never made wiser by his sufferings, nor preserved by one 
misfortune from falling into another. He proceeded throughout his 
life to tread the same steps on the same circle; always 
applauding his past conduct, or at least forgetting it, to amuse 
himself with phantoms of happiness which were dancing before him, 
and willingly turned his eyes from the light of reason, when it 
would have discovered the illusion and shewn him, what he never 
wished to see, his real state.</p>

<p><span class="par">[169]</span> He is even accused, after 
having lulled his imagination with those ideal opiates, of having 
tried the same experiment upon his conscience; and, having 
accustomed himself to impute all deviations from the right to 
foreign causes, it is certain that he was upon every occasion too 
easily reconciled to himself, and that he appeared very little to 
regret those practices which had impaired his reputation. The 
reigning error of his life was, that he mistook the love for the 
practice of virtue, and was indeed not so much a good man as the 
friend of goodness.</p>

<p><span class="par">[170]</span> This at least must be allowed 
him, that he always preserved a strong sense of the dignity, the 
beauty, and the necessity of virtue, and that he never 
contributed deliberately to spread corruption amongst mankind. 
His actions, which were generally precipitate, were often 
blameable; but his writings, being the productions of study, 
uniformly tended to the exaltation of the mind, and the 
propagation of morality and piety.</p>

<p><span class="par">[171]</span> These writings may improve 
mankind when his failings shall be forgotten, and therefore he 
must be considered, upon the whole, as a benefactor to the world; 
nor can his personal example do any hurt, since, whoever hears of 
his faults, will hear of the miseries which they brought upon 
him, and which would deserve less pity had not his condition been 
such as made his faults pardonable. He may be considered as a 
child exposed to all the temptations of indigence at an age when 
resolution was not yet strengthened by conviction, nor virtue 
confirmed by habit; a circumstance which in his 
<cite>Bastard</cite> he laments in a very affecting manner:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;&mdash;&mdash;No Mother's care<br>
Shielded my infant innocence with prayer:<br>
No Father's guardian-hand my youth maintain'd,<br>
Call'd forth my virtues, or from vice restrain'd.&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[172]</span> <cite>The Bastard</cite>, 
however it might provoke or mortify his mother, could not be 
expected to melt her to compassion, so that he was still under 
the same want of the necessities of life, and he therefore 
exerted all the interest which his wit, or his birth, or his 
misfortunes, could procure, to obtain, upon the death of Eusden, 
the place of Poet Laureat, and prosecuted his application with so 
much diligence that the King publicly declared it his intention 
to bestow it upon him; but such was the fate of Savage that even 
the King, when he intended his advantage, was disappointed in his 
schemes, for the Lord Chamberlain, who has the disposal of the 
laurel, as one of the appendages of his office, either did not 
know the King's design or did not approve it, or thought the 
nomination of the Laureat an encroachment upon his rights, and 
therefore bestowed the laurel upon Colley Cibber.</p>

<p><span class="par">[173]</span> Mr. Savage, thus disappointed, 
took a resolution of applying to the queen that, having once 
given him life, she would enable him to support it, and therefore 
published a short poem on her birth-day, to which he gave the odd 
title of <cite>Volunteer Laureat</cite>. The event of this essay 
he has himself related in the following letter, which he prefixed 
to the poem when he afterwards reprinted it in <cite>The 
Gentleman's Magazine</cite>, from whence I have copied it intire, 
as this was one of the few attempts in which Mr. Savage 
succeeded.</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;Mr. <span class="sc">Urban</span>,</p>

<p>&ldquo;In your Magazine for February you published the last 
<cite>Volunteer Laureat</cite>, written on a very melancholy 
occasion, the death of the royal patroness of arts and literature 
in general, and of the author of that poem in particular; I now 
send you the first that Mr. Savage wrote under that title. 
&mdash; This gentleman, notwithstanding a very considerable 
interest, being, on the death of Mr. Eusden, disappointed of the 
Laureat's place, wrote the before-mentioned poem, which was no 
sooner published but the late Queen sent to a bookseller for it: 
the author had not at that time a friend either to get him 
introduced or his poem presented at court, yet such was the 
unspeakable goodness of that Princess that, notwithstanding this 
act of ceremony was wanting, in a few days after publication Mr. 
Savage received a Bank-bill of fifty pounds, and a gracious 
message from her Majesty, by the Lord North and Guilford, to this 
effect: &lsquo;That her Majesty was highly pleased with the 
verses; that she took particularly kind his lines there relating 
to the King; that he had permission to write annually on the same 
subject; and that he should yearly receive the like present, till 
something better (which was her Majesty's intention) could be 
done for him.&rsquo; After this, he was permitted to present one 
of his annual poems to her Majesty, had the honour of kissing her 
hand, and met with the most gracious reception. Yours, 
&amp;c.&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[174]</span> Such was the performance, and 
such its reception; a reception which, though by no means unkind, 
was yet not in the highest degree generous: to chain down the 
genius of a writer to an annual panegyrick shewed in the Queen 
too much desire of hearing her own praises, and a greater regard 
to herself than to him on whom her bounty was conferred. It was a 
kind of avaricious generosity, by which flattery was rather 
purchased than genius rewarded.</p>

<p><span class="par">[175]</span> Mrs. Oldfield had formerly 
given him the same allowance with much more heroic intention; she 
had no other view than to enable him to prosecute his studies and 
to set himself above the want of assistance, and was contented 
with doing good without stipulating for encomiums.</p>

<p><span class="par">[176]</span> Mr. Savage, however, was not at 
liberty to make exceptions, but was ravished with the favours 
which he had received, and probably yet more with those which he 
was promised; he considered himself now as a favourite of the 
Queen, and did not doubt but a few annual poems would establish 
him in some profitable employment.</p>

<p><span class="par">[177]</span> He therefore assumed the title 
of <cite>Volunteer Laureat</cite>, not without some reprehensions 
from Cibber, who informed him that the title of 
<cite>Laureat</cite> was a mark of honour conferred by the King, 
from whom all honour is derived, and which therefore no man has a 
right to bestow upon himself; and added, that he might with equal 
propriety style himself a Volunteer Lord, or Volunteer Baronet. 
It cannot be denied that the remark was just; but Savage did not 
think any title, which was conferred upon Mr. Cibber, so 
honourable as that the usurpation of it could be imputed to him 
as an instance of very exorbitant vanity, and therefore continued 
to write under the same title, and received every year the same 
reward.</p>

<p><span class="par">[178]</span> He did not appear to consider 
these encomiums as tests of his abilities, or as any thing more 
than annual hints to the Queen of her promise, or acts of 
ceremony, by the performance of which he was intitled to his 
pension, and therefore did not labour them with great diligence, 
or print more than fifty each year, except that for some of the 
last years he regularly inserted them in <cite>The Gentleman's 
Magazine</cite>, by which they were dispersed over the 
kingdom.</p>

<p><span class="par">[179]</span> Of some of them he had himself 
so low an opinion that he intended to omit them in the collection 
of poems, for which he printed proposals and solicited 
subscriptions; nor can it seem strange that, being confined to 
the same subject, he should be at some times indolent, and at 
others unsuccessful; that he should sometimes delay a 
disagreeable task till it was too late to perform it well; or 
that he should sometimes repeat the same sentiment on the same 
occasion, or at others be misled by an attempt after novelty to 
forced conceptions and far-fetched images.</p>

<p><span class="par">[180]</span> He wrote indeed with a double 
intention, which supplied him with some variety; for his business 
was to praise the Queen for the favours which he had received, 
and to complain to her of the delay of those which she had 
promised: in some of his pieces, therefore, gratitude is 
predominant, and in some discontent; in some he represents 
himself as happy in her patronage, and in others as disconsolate 
to find himself neglected.</p>

<p><span class="par">[181]</span> Her promise, like other 
promises made to this unfortunate man, was never performed, 
though he took sufficient care that it should not be forgotten. 
The publication of his <cite>Volunteer Laureat</cite> procured 
him no other reward than a regular remittance of fifty 
pounds.</p>

<p><span class="par">[182]</span> He was not so depressed by his 
disappointments as to neglect any opportunity that was offered of 
advancing his interest. When the Princess Anne was married he 
wrote a poem upon her departure, only, as he declared, 
&ldquo;because it was expected from him,&rdquo; and he was not 
willing to bar his own prospects by any appearance of 
neglect.</p>

<p><span class="par">[183]</span> He never mentioned any 
advantage gained by this poem, or any regard that was paid to it, 
and therefore it is likely that it was considered at court as an 
act of duty to which he was obliged by his dependence, and which 
it was therefore not necessary to reward by any new favour; or 
perhaps the Queen really intended his advancement, and therefore 
thought it superfluous to lavish presents upon a man whom she 
intended to establish for life.</p>

<p><span class="par">[184]</span> About this time not only his 
hopes were in danger of being frustrated, but his pension 
likewise of being obstructed, by an accidental calumny. The 
writer of <cite>The Daily Courant</cite>, a paper then published 
under the direction of the ministry, charged him with a crime, 
which, though not very great in itself, would have been 
remarkably invidious in him, and might very justly have incensed 
the Queen against him. He was accused by name of influencing 
elections against the court, by appearing at the head of a Tory 
mob; nor did the accuser fail to aggravate his crime by 
representing it as the effect of the most atrocious ingratitude, 
and a kind of rebellion against the Queen, who had first 
preserved him from an infamous death, and afterwards 
distinguished him by her favour, and supported him by her 
charity. The charge, as it was open and confident, was likewise 
by good fortune very particular. The place of the transaction was 
mentioned, and the whole series of the rioter's conduct related. 
This exactness made Mr. Savage's vindication easy; for he never 
had in his life seen the place which was declared to be the scene 
of his wickedness, nor ever had been present in any town when its 
representatives were chosen. This answer he therefore made haste 
to publish, with all the circumstances necessary to make it 
credible; and very reasonably demanded that the accusation should 
be retracted in the same paper, that he might no longer suffer 
the imputation of sedition and ingratitude. This demand was 
likewise pressed by him in a private letter to the author of the 
paper, who, either trusting to the protection of those whose 
defence he had undertaken, or having entertained some personal 
malice against Mr. Savage, or fearing lest, by retracting so 
confident an assertion, he should impair the credit of his paper, 
refused to give him that satisfaction.</p>

<p><span class="par">[185]</span> Mr. Savage therefore thought it 
necessary to his own vindication to prosecute him in the King's 
Bench; but as he did not find any ill effects from the 
accusation, having sufficiently cleared his innocence, he thought 
any farther procedure would have the appearance of revenge, and 
therefore willingly dropped it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[186]</span> He saw soon afterwards a 
process commenced in the same court against himself, on an 
information in which he was accused of writing and publishing an 
obscene pamphlet.</p>

<p><span class="par">[187]</span> It was always Mr. Savage's 
desire to be distinguished; and, when any controversy became 
popular, he never wanted some reason for engaging in it with 
great ardour, and appearing at the head of the party which he had 
chosen. As he was never celebrated for his prudence, he had no 
sooner taken his side, and informed himself of the chief topicks 
of the dispute, than he took all opportunities of asserting and 
propagating his principles, without much regard to his own 
interest, or any other visible design than that of drawing upon 
himself the attention of mankind.</p>

<p><span class="par">[188]</span> The dispute between the Bishop 
of London and the Chancellor is well known to have been for some 
time the chief topick of political conversation, and therefore 
Mr. Savage, in pursuance of his character, endeavoured to become 
conspicuous among the controvertists with which every 
coffee-house was filled on that occasion. He was an indefatigable 
opposer of all the claims of ecclesiastical power, though he did 
not know on what they were founded; and was therefore no friend 
to the Bishop of London. But he had another reason for appearing 
as a warm advocate for Dr. Rundle; for he was the friend of Mr. 
Foster and Mr. Thomson, who were the friends of Mr. Savage.</p>

<p><span class="par">[189]</span> Thus remote was his interest in 
the question, which, however, as he imagined, concerned him so 
nearly that it was not sufficient to harangue and dispute, but 
necessary likewise to write upon it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[190]</span> He therefore engaged with great 
ardour in a new poem, called by him <cite>The Progress of a 
Divine</cite>, in which he conducts a profligate priest by all 
the gradations of wickedness from a poor curacy in the country to 
the highest preferments of the church, and describes with that 
humour which was natural to him, and that knowledge which was 
extended to all the diversities of human life, his behaviour in 
every station; and insinuates that this priest, thus 
accomplished, found at last a patron in the Bishop of London.</p>

<p><span class="par">[191]</span> When he was asked by one of his 
friends on what pretence he could charge the bishop with such an 
action, he had no more to say, than that he had only inverted the 
accusation, and that he thought it reasonable to believe that he, 
who obstructed the rise of a good man without reason, would for 
bad reasons promote the exaltation of a villain.</p>

<p><span class="par">[192]</span> The clergy were universally 
provoked by this satire; and Savage, who, as was his constant 
practice, had set his name to his performance, was censured in 
<cite>The Weekly Miscellany</cite> with severity, which he did 
not seem inclined to forget.</p>

<p><span class="par">[193]</span> But a return of invective was 
not thought a sufficient punishment. The Court of King's Bench 
was therefore moved against him, and he was obliged to return an 
answer to a charge of obscenity. It was urged in his defence that 
obscenity was criminal when it was intended to promote the 
practice of vice, but that Mr. Savage had only introduced obscene 
ideas with the view of exposing them to detestation, and of 
amending the age, by shewing the deformity of wickedness. This 
plea was admitted; and Sir Philip Yorke, who then presided in 
that court, dismissed the information with encomiums upon the 
purity and excellence of Mr Savage's writings.</p>

<p><span class="par">[194]</span> The prosecution, however, 
answered in some measure the purpose of those by whom it was set 
on foot; for Mr. Savage was so far intimidated by it that, when 
the edition of his poem was sold, he did not venture to reprint 
it; so that it was in a short time forgotten, or forgotten by all 
but those whom it offended.</p>

<p><span class="par">[195]</span> It is said that some endeavours 
were used to incense the Queen against him; but he found 
advocates to obviate at least part of their effect, for though he 
was never advanced, he still continued to receive his 
pension.</p>

<p><span class="par">[196]</span> This poem drew more infamy upon 
him than any incident of his life; and, as his conduct cannot be 
vindicated, it is proper to secure his memory from reproach, by 
informing those whom he made his enemies that he never intended 
to repeat the provocation; and that, though, whenever he thought 
he had any reason to complain of the clergy, he used to threaten 
them with a new edition of <cite>The Progress of a Divine</cite>, 
it was his calm and settled resolution to suppress it for 
ever.</p>

<p><span class="par">[197]</span> He once intended to have made a 
better reparation for the folly or injustice with which he might 
be charged by writing another poem, called <cite>The Progress of 
a Freethinker</cite>, whom he intended to lead through all the 
stages of vice and folly, to convert him from virtue to 
wickedness, and from religion to infidelity, by all the modish 
sophistry used for that purpose; and at last to dismiss him by 
his own hand into the other world.</p>

<p><span class="par">[198]</span> That he did not execute this 
design is a real loss to mankind, for he was too well acquainted 
with all the scenes of debauchery to have failed in his 
representations of them, and too zealous for virtue not to have 
represented them in such a manner as should expose them either to 
ridicule or detestation.</p>

<p><span class="par">[199]</span> But this plan was, like others, 
formed and laid aside, till the vigour of his imagination was 
spent, and the effervescence of invention had subsided; but soon 
gave way to some other design, which pleased by its novelty for a 
while, and then was neglected like the former.</p>

<p><span class="par">[200]</span> He was still in his usual 
exigences, having no certain support but the pension allowed him 
by the Queen, which, though it might have kept an exact 
oeconomist from want, was very far from being sufficient for Mr. 
Savage, who had never been accustomed to dismiss any of his 
appetites without the gratification which they solicited, and 
whom nothing but want of money withheld from partaking of every 
pleasure that fell within his view.</p>

<p><span class="par">[201]</span> His conduct with regard to his 
pension was very particular. No sooner had he changed the bill 
than he vanished from the sight of all his acquaintances, and lay 
for some time out of the reach of all the enquiries that 
friendship or curiosity could make after him; at length he 
appeared again pennyless as before, but never informed even those 
whom he seemed to regard most where he had been, nor was his 
retreat ever discovered.</p>

<p><span class="par">[202]</span> This was his constant practice 
during the whole time that he received the pension from the 
Queen: he regularly disappeared and returned. He indeed affirmed 
that he retired to study, and that the money supported him in 
solitude for many months; but his friends declared that the short 
time in which it was spent sufficiently confuted his own account 
of his conduct.</p>

<p><span class="par">[203]</span> His politeness and his wit 
still raised him friends, who were desirous of setting him at 
length free from that indigence by which he had been hitherto 
oppressed; and therefore solicited Sir Robert Walpole in his 
favour, with so much earnestness that they obtained a promise of 
the next place that should become vacant, not exceeding two 
hundred pounds a year. This promise was made with an uncommon 
declaration, &ldquo;that it was not the promise of a minister to 
a petitioner, but of a friend to his friend.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[204]</span> Mr. Savage now concluded 
himself set at ease for ever, and, as he observes in a poem 
written on that incident of his life, &ldquo;trusted and was 
trusted&rdquo;; but soon found that his confidence was 
ill-grounded, and this <cite>friendly</cite> promise was not 
inviolable. He spent a long time in solicitations, and at last 
despaired and desisted.</p>

<p><span class="par">[205]</span> He did not indeed deny that he 
had given the minister some reason to believe that he should not 
strengthen his own interest by advancing him, for he had taken 
care to distinguish himself in coffee-houses as an advocate for 
the ministry of the last years of Queen Anne, and was always 
ready to justify the conduct and exalt the character of Lord 
Bolingbroke, whom he mentions with great regard in an 
<cite>Epistle Upon Authors</cite>, which he wrote about that time 
but was too wise to publish, and of which only some fragments 
have appeared, inserted by him in the <cite>Magazine</cite> after 
his retirement.</p>

<p><span class="par">[206]</span> To despair was not, however, 
the character of Savage; when one patronage failed, he had 
recourse to another. The prince was now extremely popular, and 
had very liberally rewarded the merit of some writers whom Mr. 
Savage did not think superior to himself and therefore he 
resolved to address a poem to him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[207]</span> For this purpose he made choice 
of a subject which could regard only persons of the highest rank 
and highest affluence and which was therefore proper for a poem 
intended to procure the patronage of a prince; and having retired 
for some time to Richmond, that he might prosecute his design in 
full tranquillity, without the temptations of pleasure, or the 
solicitations of creditors, by which his meditations were in 
equal danger of being disconcerted, he produced a poem <cite>On 
Publick Spirit, with regard to Publick Works</cite>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[208]</span> The plan of this poem is very 
extensive, and comprises a multitude of topicks, each of which 
might furnish matter sufficient for a long performance, and of 
which some have already employed more eminent writers; but as he 
was perhaps not fully acquainted with the whole extent of his own 
design, and was writing to obtain a supply of wants too pressing 
to admit of long or accurate enquiries, he passes negligently 
over many publick works, which, even in his own opinion, deserved 
to be more elaborately treated.</p>

<p><span class="par">[209]</span> But though he may sometimes 
disappoint his reader by transient touches upon these subjects, 
which have often been considered, and therefore naturally raise 
expectations, he must be allowed amply to compensate his 
omissions by expatiating, in the conclusion of his work, upon a 
kind of beneficence not yet celebrated by any eminent poet, 
though it now appears more susceptible of embellishments, more 
adapted to exalt the ideas, and affect the passions, than many of 
those which have hitherto been thought most worthy of the 
ornaments of verse. The settlement of colonies in uninhabited 
countries, the establishment of those in security whose 
misfortunes have made their own country no longer pleasing or 
safe, the acquisition of property without injury to any, the 
appropriation of the waste and luxuriant bounties of nature, and 
the enjoyment of those gifts which heaven has scattered upon 
regions uncultivated and unoccupied, cannot be considered without 
giving rise to a great number of pleasing ideas, and bewildering 
the imagination in delightful prospects; and, therefore, whatever 
speculations they may produce in those who have confined 
themselves to political studies, naturally fixed the attention 
and excited the applause of a poet. The politician, when he 
considers men driven into other countries for shelter, and 
obliged to retire to forests and deserts, and pass their lives 
and fix their posterity in the remotest corners of the world, to 
avoid those hardships which they suffer or fear in their native 
place, may very properly enquire why the legislature does not 
provide a remedy for these miseries, rather than encourage an 
escape from them. He may conclude that the flight of every honest 
man is a loss to the community; that those who are unhappy 
without guilt ought to be relieved, and the life, which is 
overburthened by accidental calamities, set at ease by the care 
of the publick; and that those who have by misconduct forfeited 
their claim to favour ought rather to be made useful to the 
society which they have injured, than driven from it. But the 
poet is employed in a more pleasing undertaking than that of 
proposing laws, which, however just or expedient, will never be 
made, or endeavouring to reduce to rational schemes of government 
societies which were formed by chance, and are conducted by the 
private passions of those who preside in them. He guides the 
unhappy fugitive from want and persecution to plenty, quiet, and 
security, and seats him in scenes of peaceful solitude and 
undisturbed repose.</p>

<p><span class="par">[210]</span> Savage has not forgotten, 
amidst the pleasing sentiments which this prospect of retirement 
suggested to him, to censure those crimes which have been 
generally committed by the discoverers of new regions, and to 
expose the enormous wickedness of making war upon barbarous 
nations because they cannot resist and of invading countries 
because they are fruitful; of extending navigation only to 
propagate vice, and of visiting distant lands only to lay them 
waste. He has asserted the natural equality of mankind, and 
endeavoured to suppress that pride which inclines men to imagine 
that right is the consequence of power.</p>

<p><span class="par">[211]</span> His description of the various 
miseries which force men to seek for refuge in distant countries 
affords another instance of his proficiency in the important and 
extensive study of human life; and the tenderness with which he 
recounts them, another proof of his humanity and benevolence.</p>

<p><span class="par">[212]</span> It is observable that the close 
of this poem discovers a change which experience had made in Mr. 
Savage's opinions. In a poem written by him in his youth, and 
published in his <cite>Miscellanies</cite>, he declares his 
contempt of the contracted views and narrow prospects of the 
middle state of life, and declares his resolution either to tower 
like the cedar, or be trampled like the shrub; but in this poem, 
though addressed to a prince, he mentions this state of life as 
comprising those who ought most to attract reward, those who 
merit most the confidence of power, and the familiarity of 
greatness; and, accidentally mentioning this passage to one of 
his friends, declared that in his opinion all the virtue of 
mankind was comprehended in that state.</p>

<p><span class="par">[213]</span> In describing villas and 
gardens he did not omit to condemn that absurd custom which 
prevails among the English, of permitting servants to receive 
money from strangers for the entertainment that they receive, and 
therefore inserted in his poem these lines:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;But what the flowering pride of gardens rare,<br>
However royal, or however fair,<br>
If gates, which to access should still give way<br>
Ope but, like Peter's paradise, for pay?<br>
If perquisited varlets frequent stand,<br>
And each new walk must a new tax demand?<br>
What foreign eye but with contempt surveys?<br>
What Muse shall from oblivion snatch their praise?&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[214]</span> But before the publication of 
his performance he recollected that the Queen allowed her garden 
and cave at Richmond to be shewn for money, and that she so 
openly countenanced the practice that she had bestowed the 
privilege of shewing them as a place of profit on a man whose 
merit she valued herself upon rewarding, though she gave him only 
the liberty of disgracing his country.</p>

<p><span class="par">[215]</span> He therefore thought, with more 
prudence than was often exerted by him, that the publication of 
these lines might be officiously represented as an insult upon 
the Queen, to whom he owed his life and his subsistence, and that 
the propriety of his observation would be no security against the 
censures which the unseasonableness of it might draw upon him; he 
therefore suppressed the passage in the first edition, but after 
the Queen's death thought the same caution no longer necessary, 
and restored it to the proper place.</p>

<p><span class="par">[216]</span> The poem was therefore 
published without any political faults, and inscribed to the 
Prince; but Mr. Savage, having no friend upon whom he could 
prevail to present it to him, had no other method of attracting 
his observation than the publication of frequent advertisements, 
and therefore received no reward from his patron, however 
generous on other occasions.</p>

<p><span class="par">[217]</span> This disappointment he never 
mentioned without indignation, being by some means or other 
confident that the Prince was not ignorant of his address to him; 
and insinuated that, if any advances in popularity could have 
been made by distinguishing him, he had not written without 
notice, or without reward.</p>

<p><span class="par">[218]</span> He was once inclined to have 
presented his poem in person, and sent to the printer for a copy 
with that design: but either his opinion changed or his 
resolution deserted him, and he continued to resent neglect 
without attempting to force himself into regard.</p>

<p><span class="par">[219]</span> Nor was the publick much more 
favourable than his patron, for only seventy-two were sold, 
though the performance was much commended by some whose judgement 
in that kind of writing is generally allowed. But Savage easily 
reconciled himself to mankind without imputing any defect to his 
work, by observing that his poem was unluckily published two days 
after the prorogation of the parliament, and by consequence at a 
time when all those who could be expected to regard it were in 
the hurry of preparing for their departure, or engaged in taking 
leave of others upon their dismission from publick affairs.</p>

<p><span class="par">[220]</span> It must be however allowed, in 
justification of the publick, that this performance is not the 
most excellent of Mr. Savage's works, and that, though it cannot 
be denied to contain many striking sentiments, majestick lines, 
and just observations, it is in general not sufficiently polished 
in the language, or enlivened in the imagery, or digested in the 
plan.</p>

<p><span class="par">[221]</span> Thus his poem contributed 
nothing to the alleviation of his poverty, which was such as very 
few could have supported with equal patience, but to which it 
must likewise be confessed that few would have been exposed who 
received punctually fifty pounds a year; a salary which, though 
by no means equal to the demands of vanity and luxury, is yet 
found sufficient to support families above want, and was 
undoubtedly more than the necessities of life require.</p>

<p><span class="par">[222]</span> But no sooner had he received 
his pension than he withdrew to his darling privacy, from which 
he returned in a short time to his former distress; and for some 
part of the year generally lived by chance, eating only when he 
was invited to the tables of his acquaintances, from which the 
meanness of his dress often excluded him, when the politeness and 
variety of his conversation would have been thought a sufficient 
recompence for his entertainment.</p>

<p><span class="par">[223]</span> He lodged as much by accident 
as he dined, and passed the night sometimes in mean houses, which 
are set open at night to any casual wanderers, sometimes in 
cellars, among the riot and filth of the meanest and most 
profligate of the rabble; and sometimes, when he had not money to 
support even the expences of these receptacles, walked about the 
streets till he was weary, and lay down in the summer upon a 
bulk, or in the winter, with his associates in poverty, among the 
ashes of a glass-house.</p>

<p><span class="par">[224]</span> In this manner were passed 
those days and those nights which nature had enabled him to have 
employed in elevated speculations, useful studies, or pleasing 
conversation. On a bulk, in a cellar, or in a glass-house among 
thieves and beggars, was to be found the Author of <cite>The 
Wanderer</cite>, the man of exalted sentiments, extensive views, 
and curious observations; the man whose remarks on life might 
have assisted the statesman, whose ideas of virtue might have 
enlightened the moralist, whose eloquence might have influenced 
senates, and whose delicacy might have polished courts.</p>

<p><span class="par">[225]</span> It cannot but be imagined that 
such necessities might sometimes force him upon disreputable 
practices; and it is probable that these lines in <cite>The 
Wanderer</cite> were occasioned by his reflections on his own 
conduct:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;Though misery leads to happiness and truth,<br>
Unequal to the load, this languid youth<br>
. . . . . . . . . .<br>
(O, let none censure, if, untried by grief,<br>
If, amidst woe, untempted by relief),<br>
He stoop'd reluctant to low arts of shame,<br>
Which then, ev'n then he scorn'd, and blush'd to name.&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[226]</span> Whoever was acquainted with him 
was certain to be solicited for small sums, which the frequency 
of the request made in time considerable, and he was therefore 
quickly shunned by those who were become familiar enough to be 
trusted with his necessities; but his rambling manner of life, 
and constant appearance at houses of publick resort, always 
procured him a new succession of friends, whose kindness had not 
been exhausted by repeated requests; so that he was seldom 
absolutely without resources, but had in his utmost exigences 
this comfort, that he always imagined himself sure of speedy 
relief.</p>

<p><span class="par">[227]</span> It was observed that he always 
asked favours of this kind without the least submission or 
apparent consciousness of dependence, and that he did not seem to 
look upon a compliance with his request as an obligation that 
deserved any extraordinary acknowledgements; but a refusal was 
resented by him as an affront, or complained of as an injury: nor 
did he readily reconcile himself to those who either denied to 
lend, or gave him afterwards any intimation that they expected to 
be repaid.</p>

<p><span class="par">[228]</span> He was sometimes so far 
compassionated by those who knew both his merit and distresses 
that they received him into their families, but they soon 
discovered him to be a very incommodious inmate; for, being 
always accustomed to an irregular manner of life, he could not 
confine himself to any stated hours, or pay any regard to the 
rules of a family, but would prolong his conversation till 
midnight, without considering that business might require his 
friend's application in the morning; and, when he had persuaded 
himself to retire to bed, was not, without equal difficulty, 
called up to dinner: it was therefore impossible to pay him any 
distinction without the entire subversion of all oeconomy, a kind 
of establishment which, wherever he went, he always appeared 
ambitious to overthrow.</p>

<p><span class="par">[229]</span> It must therefore be 
acknowledged, in justification of mankind, that it was not always 
by the negligence or coldness of his friends that Savage was 
distressed, but because it was in reality very difficult to 
preserve him long in a state of ease. To supply him with money 
was a hopeless attempt, for no sooner did he see himself master 
of a sum sufficient to set him free from care for a day, than he 
became profuse and luxurious. When once he had entered a tavern, 
or engaged in a scheme of pleasure, he never retired till want of 
money obliged him to some new expedient. If he was entertained in 
a family nothing was any longer to be regarded there but 
amusements and jollity: wherever Savage entered he immediately 
expected that order and business should fly before him, that all 
should thenceforward be left to hazard, and that no dull 
principle of domestick management should be opposed to his 
inclination, or intrude upon his gaiety.</p>

<p><span class="par">[230]</span> His distresses, however 
afflictive, never dejected him; in his lowest state he wanted not 
spirit to assert the natural dignity of wit, and was always ready 
to repress that insolence which superiority of fortune incited, 
and to trample on that reputation which rose upon any other basis 
than that of merit: he never admitted any gross familiarities, or 
submitted to be treated otherwise than as an equal. Once, when he 
was without lodging, meat, or clothes, one of his friends, a man 
not indeed remarkable for moderation in his prosperity, left a 
message, that he desired to see him about nine in the morning. 
Savage knew that his intention was to assist him; but was very 
much disgusted that he should presume to prescribe the hour of 
his attendance, and, I believe, refused to visit him, and 
rejected his kindness.</p>

<p><span class="par">[231]</span> The same invincible temper, 
whether firmness or obstinacy, appeared in his conduct to the 
Lord Tyrconnel, from whom he very frequently demanded that the 
allowance which was once paid him should be restored; but with 
whom he never appeared to entertain for a moment the thought of 
soliciting a reconciliation, and whom he treated at once with all 
the haughtiness of superiority and all the bitterness of 
resentment. He wrote to him not in a style of supplication or 
respect, but of reproach, menace, and contempt; and appeared 
determined, if he ever regained his allowance, to hold it only by 
the right of conquest.</p>

<p><span class="par">[232]</span> As many more can discover that 
a man is richer than that he is wiser than themselves, 
superiority of understanding is not so readily acknowledged as 
that of fortune; nor is that haughtiness, which the consciousness 
of great abilities incites, born with the same submission as the 
tyranny of affluence; and therefore Savage, by asserting his 
claim to deference and regard, and by treating those with 
contempt whom better fortune animated to rebel against him, did 
not fail to raise a great number of enemies in the different 
classes of mankind. Those who thought themselves raised above him 
by the advantages of riches, hated him because they found no 
protection from the petulance of his wit. Those who were esteemed 
for their writings feared him as a critic and maligned him as a 
rival, and almost all the smaller wits were his professed 
enemies.</p>

<p><span class="par">[233]</span> Among these Mr. Miller so far 
indulged his resentment as to introduce him in a farce, and 
direct him to be personated on the stage in a dress like that 
which he then wore; a mean insult, which only insinuated that 
Savage had but one coat, and which was therefore despised by him 
rather than resented; for though he wrote a lampoon against 
Miller, he never printed it: and as no other person ought to 
prosecute that revenge from which the person who was injured 
desisted, I shall not preserve what Mr. Savage suppressed: of 
which the publication would indeed have been a punishment too 
severe for so impotent an assault.</p>

<p><span class="par">[234]</span> The great hardships of poverty 
were to Savage not the want of lodging or of food, but the 
neglect and contempt which it drew upon him. He complained that 
as his affairs grew desperate he found his reputation for 
capacity visibly decline, that his opinion in questions of 
criticism was no longer regarded when his coat was out of 
fashion, and that those who in the interval of his prosperity 
were always encouraging him to great undertakings by encomiums on 
his genius and assurances of success now received any mention of 
his designs with coldness, thought that the subjects on which he 
proposed to write were very difficult, and were ready to inform 
him that the event of a poem was uncertain, that an author ought 
to employ much time in the consideration of his plan, and not 
presume to sit down to write in confidence of a few cursory ideas 
and a superficial knowledge: difficulties were started on all 
sides, and he was no longer qualified for any performance but 
<cite>The Volunteer Laureat</cite>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[235]</span> Yet even this kind of contempt 
never depressed him, for he always preserved a steady confidence 
in his own capacity, and believed nothing above his reach which 
he should at any time earnestly endeavour to attain. He formed 
schemes of the same kind with regard to knowledge and to fortune, 
and flattered himself with advances to be made in science, as 
with riches to be enjoyed in some distant period of his life. For 
the acquisition of knowledge he was indeed far better qualified 
than for that of riches, for he was naturally inquisitive and 
desirous of the conversation of those from whom any information 
was to be obtained, but by no means solicitous to improve those 
opportunities that were sometimes offered of raising his fortune: 
and he was remarkably retentive of his ideas, which, when once he 
was in possession of them, rarely forsook him; a quality which 
could never be communicated to his money.</p>

<p><span class="par">[236]</span> While he was thus wearing out 
his life in expectation that the Queen would some time recollect 
her promise, he had recourse to the usual practice of writers, 
and published proposals for printing his works by subscription, 
to which he was encouraged by the success of many who had not a 
better right to the favour of the publick; but, whatever was the 
reason, he did not find the world equally inclined to favour him: 
and he observed with some discontent that, though he offered his 
works at half a guinea, he was able to procure but a small number 
in comparison with those who subscribed twice as much to 
Duck.</p>

<p><span class="par">[237]</span> Nor was it without indignation 
that he saw his proposals neglected by the Queen, who patronised 
Mr. Duck's with uncommon ardour, and incited a competition among 
those who attended the court, who should most promote his 
interest, and who should first offer a subscription. This was a 
distinction to which Mr. Savage made no scruple of asserting that 
his birth, his misfortunes, and his genius gave him a fairer 
title than could be pleaded by him on whom it was conferred.</p>

<p><span class="par">[238]</span> Savage's applications were, 
however, not universally unsuccessful; for some of the nobility 
countenanced his design, encouraged his proposals, and subscribed 
with great liberality. He related of the Duke of Chandos 
particularly that, upon receiving his proposals, he sent him ten 
guineas.</p>

<p><span class="par">[239]</span> But the money which his 
subscriptions afforded him was not less volatile than that which 
he received from his other schemes; whenever a subscription was 
paid him he went to a tavern and, as money so collected is 
necessarily received in small sums, he never was able to send his 
poems to the press, but for many years continued his 
solicitation, and squandered whatever he obtained.</p>

<p><span class="par">[240]</span> This project of printing his 
works was frequently revived; and, as his proposals grew 
obsolete, new ones were printed with fresher dates. To form 
schemes for the publication was one of his favourite amusements; 
nor was he ever more at ease than when, with any friend who 
readily fell in with his schemes, he was adjusting the print, 
forming the advertisements, and regulating the dispersion of his 
new edition, which he really intended some time to publish, and 
which, as long experience had shewn him the impossibility of 
printing the volume together, he at last determined to divide 
into weekly or monthly numbers, that the profits of the first 
might supply the expences of the next.</p>

<p><span class="par">[241]</span> Thus he spent his time in mean 
expedients and tormenting suspense, living for the greatest part 
in the fear of prosecutions from his creditors, and consequently 
skulking in obscure parts of the town, of which he was no 
stranger to the remotest corners. But wherever he came his 
address secured him friends, whom his necessities soon alienated; 
so that he had perhaps a more numerous acquaintance than any man 
ever before attained &mdash; there being scarcely any person 
eminent on any account to whom he was not known, or whose 
character he was not in some degree able to delineate.</p>

<p><span class="par">[242]</span> To the acquisition of this 
extensive acquaintance every circumstance of his life 
contributed. He excelled in the arts of conversation, and 
therefore willingly practised them. He had seldom any home, or 
even a lodging in which he could be private, and therefore was 
driven into public-houses for the common conveniences of life and 
supports of nature. He was always ready to comply with every 
invitation, having no employment to withhold him, and often no 
money to provide for himself; and by dining with one company, he 
never failed of obtaining an introduction into another.</p>

<p><span class="par">[243]</span> Thus dissipated was his life, 
and thus casual his subsistence; yet did not the distraction of 
his views hinder him from reflection, nor the uncertainty of his 
condition depress his gaiety. When he had wandered about without 
any fortunate adventure by which he was led into a tavern, he 
sometimes retired into the fields, and was able to employ his 
mind in study, or amuse it with pleasing imaginations; and seldom 
appeared to be melancholy, but when some sudden misfortune had 
just fallen upon him, and even then in a few moments he would 
disentangle himself from his perplexity, adopt the subject of 
conversation, and apply his mind wholly to the objects that 
others presented to it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[244]</span> This life, unhappy as it may be 
already imagined, was yet imbittered, in 1738, with new 
calamities. The death of the Queen deprived him of all the 
prospects of preferment with which he so long entertained his 
imagination, and, as Sir Robert Walpole had before given him 
reason to believe that he never intended the performance of his 
promise, he was now abandoned again to fortune.</p>

<p><span class="par">[245]</span> He was however, at that time, 
supported by a friend; and as it was not his custom to look out 
for distant calamities, or to feel any other pain than that which 
forced itself upon his senses, he was not much afflicted at his 
loss, and perhaps comforted himself that his pension would be now 
continued without the annual tribute of a panegyrick.</p>

<p><span class="par">[246]</span> Another expectation contributed 
likewise to support him: he had taken a resolution to write a 
second tragedy upon the story of Sir Thomas Overbury, in which he 
preserved a few lines of his former play, but made a total 
alteration of the plan, added new incidents, and introduced new 
characters; so that it was a new tragedy, not a revival of the 
former.</p>

<p><span class="par">[247]</span> Many of his friends blamed him 
for not making choice of another subject; but, in vindication of 
himself, he asserted that it was not easy to find a better, and 
that he thought it his interest to extinguish the memory of the 
first tragedy, which he could only do by writing one less 
defective upon the same story; by which he should entirely defeat 
the artifice of the booksellers, who, after the death of any 
author of reputation, are always industrious to swell his works 
by uniting his worst productions with his best.</p>

<p><span class="par">[248]</span> In the execution of this 
scheme, however, he proceeded but slowly, and probably only 
employed himself upon it when he could find no other amusement; 
but he pleased himself with counting the profits, and perhaps 
imagined that the theatrical reputation which he was about to 
acquire would be equivalent to all that he had lost by the death 
of his patroness.</p>

<p><span class="par">[249]</span> He did not, in confidence of 
his approaching riches neglect the measures proper to secure the 
continuance of his pension, though some of his favourers thought 
him culpable for omitting to write on her death; but on her 
birth-day next year he gave a proof of the solidity of his 
judgement and the power of his genius. He knew that the track of 
elegy had been so long beaten that it was impossible to travel in 
it without treading in the footsteps of those who had gone before 
him; and that therefore it was necessary that he might 
distinguish himself from the herd of encomiasts, to find out some 
new walk of funeral panegyrick.</p>

<p><span class="par">[250]</span> This difficult task he 
performed in such a manner, that his poem may be justly ranked 
among the best pieces that the death of princes has produced. By 
transferring the mention of her death to her birth-day he has 
formed a happy combination of topicks, which any other man would 
have thought it very difficult to connect in one view, but which 
he has united in such a manner that the relation between them 
appears natural; and it may be justly said that what no other man 
would have thought on, it now appears scarcely possible for any 
man to miss.</p>

<p><span class="par">[251]</span> The beauty of this peculiar 
combination of images is so masterly, that it is sufficient to 
set this poem above censure; and therefore it is not necessary to 
mention many other delicate touches which may be found in it, and 
which would deservedly be admired in any other performance.</p>

<p><span class="par">[252]</span> To these proofs of his genius 
may be added from the same poem an instance of his prudence, an 
excellence for which he was not so often distinguished; he does 
not forget to remind the King, in the most delicate and artful 
manner, of continuing his pension.</p>

<p><span class="par">[253]</span> With regard to the success of 
this address he was for some time in suspence, but was in no 
great degree solicitous about it; and continued his labour upon 
his new tragedy with great tranquillity till the friend who had 
for a considerable time supported him, removing his family to 
another place, took occasion to dismiss him. It then became 
necessary to enquire more diligently what was determined in his 
affair, having reason to suspect that no great favour was 
intended him, because he had not received his pension at the 
usual time.</p>

<p><span class="par">[254]</span> It is said that he did not take 
those methods of retrieving his interest which were most likely 
to succeed, and some of those who were employed in the Exchequer 
cautioned him against too much violence in his proceedings; but 
Mr. Savage, who seldom regulated his conduct by the advice of 
others, gave way to his passion, and demanded of Sir Robert 
Walpole at his levee the reason of the distinction that was made 
between him and the other pensioners of the Queen, with a degree 
of roughness which perhaps determined him to withdraw what had 
been only delayed.</p>

<p><span class="par">[255]</span> Whatever was the crime of which 
he was accused or suspected, and whatever influence was employed 
against him, he received soon after an account that took from him 
all hopes of regaining his pension; and he had now no prospect of 
subsistence but from his play, and he knew no way of living for 
the time required to finish it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[256]</span> So peculiar were the 
misfortunes of this man, deprived of an estate and title by a 
particular law, exposed and abandoned by a mother, defrauded by a 
mother of a fortune which his father had allotted him, he entered 
the world without a friend; and though his abilities forced 
themselves into esteem and reputation he was never able to obtain 
any real advantage, and whatever prospects arose were always 
intercepted as he began to approach them. The King's intentions 
in his favour were frustrated; his dedication to the Prince, 
whose generosity on every other occasion was eminent, procured 
him no reward; Sir Robert Walpole, who valued himself upon 
keeping his promise to others, broke it to him without regret; 
and the bounty of the Queen was after her death withdrawn from 
him, and from him only.</p>

<p><span class="par">[257]</span> Such were his misfortunes, 
which yet he bore, not only with decency, but with cheerfulness; 
nor was his gaiety clouded even by his last disappointments, 
though he was in a short time reduced to the lowest degree of 
distress, and often wanted both lodging and food. At this time he 
gave another instance of the insurmountable obstinacy of his 
spirit: his clothes were worn out, and he received notice that at 
a coffee-house some clothes and linen were left for him &mdash; 
the person who sent them did not, I believe, inform him to whom 
he was to be obliged, that he might spare the perplexity of 
acknowledging the benefit &mdash; but though the offer was so far 
generous it was made with some neglect of ceremonies, which Mr. 
Savage so much resented that he refused the present, and declined 
to enter the house till the clothes that had been designed for 
him were taken away.</p>

<p><span class="par">[258]</span> His distress was now publickly 
known, and his friends, therefore, thought it proper to concert 
some measures for his relief; and one of them wrote a letter to 
him, in which he expressed his concern &ldquo;for the miserable 
withdrawing of his pension&rdquo;; and gave him hopes that in a 
short time he should find himself supplied with a competence, 
&ldquo;without any dependence on those little creatures which we 
are pleased to call the Great.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[259]</span> The scheme proposed for this 
happy and independent subsistence was that he should retire into 
Wales, and receive an allowance of fifty pounds a year, to be 
raised by a subscription, on which he was to live privately in a 
cheap place, without aspiring any more to affluence, or having 
any farther care of reputation.</p>

<p><span class="par">[260]</span> This offer Mr. Savage gladly 
accepted, though with intentions very different from those of his 
friends; for they proposed that he should continue an exile from 
London for ever, and spend all the remaining part of his life at 
Swansea; but he designed only to take the opportunity, which 
their scheme offered him, of retreating for a short time that he 
might prepare his play for the stage and his other works for the 
press, and then to return to London to exhibit his tragedy, and 
live upon the profits of his own labour.</p>

<p><span class="par">[261]</span> With regard to his works, he 
proposed very great improvements, which would have required much 
time, or great application; and when he had finished them he 
designed to do justice to his subscribers, by publishing them 
according to his proposals.</p>

<p><span class="par">[262]</span> As he was ready to entertain 
himself with future pleasures, he had planned out a scheme of 
life for the country, of which he had no knowledge but from 
pastorals and songs. He imagined that he should be transported to 
scenes of flowery felicity, like those which one poet has 
reflected to another; and had projected a perpetual round of 
innocent pleasures, of which he suspected no interruption from 
pride, or ignorance, or brutality.</p>

<p><span class="par">[263]</span> With these expectations he was 
so enchanted, that when he was once gently reproached by a friend 
for submitting to live upon a subscription, and advised rather by 
a resolute exertion of his abilities to support himself, he could 
not bear to debar himself from the happiness which was to be 
found in the calm of a cottage, or lose the opportunity of 
listening without intermission to the melody of the nightingale, 
which he believed was to be heard from every bramble, and which 
he did not fail to mention as a very important part of the 
happiness of a country life.</p>

<p><span class="par">[264]</span> While this scheme was ripening 
his friends directed him to take a lodging in the liberties of 
the Fleet, that he might be secure from his creditors, and sent 
him every Monday a guinea, which he commonly spent before the 
next morning, and trusted, after his usual manner, the remaining 
part of the week to the bounty of fortune.</p>

<p><span class="par">[265]</span> He now began very sensibly to 
feel the miseries of dependence. Those by whom he was to be 
supported began to prescribe to him with an air of authority, 
which he knew not how decently to resent nor patiently to bear; 
and he soon discovered from the conduct of most of his 
subscribers, that he was yet in the hands of &ldquo;little 
creatures.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[266]</span> Of the insolence that he was 
obliged to suffer he gave many instances, of which none appeared 
to raise his indignation to a greater height than the method 
which was taken of furnishing him with clothes. Instead of 
consulting him, and allowing him to send a taylor his orders for 
what they thought proper to allow him, they proposed to send for 
a taylor to take his measure, and then to consult how they should 
equip him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[267]</span> This treatment was not very 
delicate, nor was it such as Savage's humanity would have 
suggested to him on a like occasion; but it had scarcely deserved 
mention had it not, by affecting him in an uncommon degree, shewn 
the peculiarity of his character. Upon hearing the design that 
was formed he came to the lodging of a friend with the most 
violent agonies of rage, and being asked what it could be that 
gave him such disturbance, he replied with the utmost vehemence 
of indignation, &ldquo;That they had sent for a taylor to measure 
him.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[268]</span> How the affair ended was never 
enquired, for fear of renewing his uneasiness. It is probable 
that, upon recollection, he submitted with a good grace to what 
he could not avoid, and that he discovered no resentment where he 
had no power.</p>

<p><span class="par">[269]</span> He was, however, not humbled to 
implicit and universal compliance; for when the gentleman, who 
had first informed him of the design to support him by a 
subscription, attempted to procure a reconciliation with the Lord 
Tyrconnel, he could by no means be prevailed upon to comply with 
the measures that were proposed.</p>

<p><span class="par">[270]</span> A letter was written for him to 
Sir William Lemon, to prevail upon him to interpose his good 
offices with Lord Tyrconnel, in which he solicited Sir William's 
assistance, &ldquo;for a man who really needed it as much as any 
man could well do,&rdquo; and informed him that he was retiring 
&ldquo;for ever to a place where he should no more trouble his 
relations, friends, or enemies&rdquo;; he confessed that his 
passion had betrayed him to some conduct with regard to Lord 
Tyrconnel, &ldquo;for which he could not but heartily ask his 
pardon&rdquo;; and as he imagined Lord Tyrconnel's passion might 
be yet so high that he would not &ldquo;receive a letter from 
him,&rdquo; begged that Sir William would endeavour to soften 
him, and expressed his hopes that he would comply with his 
request, and that &ldquo;so small a relation would not harden his 
heart against him.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[271]</span> That any man should presume to 
dictate a letter to him was not very agreeable to Mr. Savage, and 
therefore he was, before he had opened it, not much inclined to 
approve it. But when he read it he found it contained sentiments 
entirely opposite to his own, and, as he asserted, to the truth; 
and therefore, instead of copying it, wrote his friend a letter 
full of masculine resentment and warm expostulations. He very 
justly observed that the style was too supplicatory, and the 
representation too abject, and that he ought at least to have 
made him complain with &ldquo;the dignity of a gentleman in 
distress.&rdquo; He declared that he would not write the 
paragraph in which he was to ask Lord Tyrconnel's pardon, for 
&ldquo;he despised his pardon, and therefore could not heartily, 
and would not hypocritically, ask it.&rdquo; He remarked that his 
friend made a very unreasonable distinction between himself and 
him; for, says he, when you mention men of high rank &ldquo;in 
your own character,&rdquo; they are &ldquo;those little creatures 
whom we are pleased to call the Great,&rdquo; but when you 
address them &ldquo;in mine,&rdquo; no servility is sufficiently 
humble. He then with great propriety explained the ill 
consequences which might be expected from such a letter, which 
his relations would print in their own defence, and which would 
for ever be produced as a full answer to all that he should 
allege against them; for he always intended to publish a minute 
account of the treatment which he had received. It is to be 
remembered, to the honour of the gentleman by whom this letter 
was drawn up, that he yielded to Mr. Savage's reasons, and agreed 
that it ought to be suppressed.</p>

<p><span class="par">[272]</span> After many alterations and 
delays, a subscription was at length raised, which did not amount 
to fifty pounds a year, though twenty were paid by one gentleman: 
such was the generosity of mankind, that what had been done by a 
player without solicitation could not now be effected by 
application and interest; and Savage had a great number to court 
and to obey for a pension less than that which Mrs. Oldfield paid 
him without exacting any servilities.</p>

<p><span class="par">[273]</span> Mr. Savage, however, was 
satisfied and willing to retire, and was convinced that the 
allowance, though scanty, would be more than sufficient for him, 
being now determined to commence a rigid oeconomist, and to live 
according to the exactest rules of frugality; for nothing was in 
his opinion more contemptible than a man who, when he knew his 
income, exceeded it; and yet he confessed that instances of such 
folly were too common, and lamented that some men were not to be 
trusted with their own money.</p>

<p><span class="par">[274]</span> Full of these salutary 
resolutions he left London in July, 1739, having taken leave with 
great tenderness of his friends, and parted from the author of 
this narrative with tears in his eyes. He was furnished with 
fifteen guineas, and informed that they would be sufficient not 
only for the expence of his journey, but for his support in Wales 
for some time, and that there remained but little more of the 
first collection. He promised a strict adherence to his maxims of 
parsimony, and went away in the stage-coach; nor did his friends 
expect to hear from him till he informed them of his arrival at 
Swansea.</p>

<p><span class="par">[275]</span> But when they least expected 
arrived a letter dated the fourteenth day after his departure, in 
which he sent them word that he was yet upon the road, and 
without money, and that he therefore could not proceed without a 
remittance. They then sent him the money that was in their hands, 
with which he was enabled to reach Bristol, from whence he was to 
go to Swansea by water.</p>

<p><span class="par">[276]</span> At Bristol he found an embargo 
laid upon the shipping, so that he could not immediately obtain a 
passage; and being therefore obliged to stay there some time he, 
with his usual felicity, ingratiated himself with many of the 
principal inhabitants, was invited to their houses, distinguished 
at their public feasts, and treated with a regard that gratified 
his vanity, and therefore easily engaged his affection.</p>

<p><span class="par">[277]</span> He began very early after his 
retirement to complain of the conduct of his friends in London, 
and irritated many of them so much by his letters that they 
withdrew, however honourably, their contributions; and it is 
believed that little more was paid him than the twenty pounds a 
year, which were allowed him by the gentleman who proposed the 
subscription.</p>

<p><span class="par">[278]</span> After some stay at Bristol he 
retired to Swansea, the place originally proposed for his 
residence, where he lived about a year, very much dissatisfied 
with the diminution of his salary; but contracted, as in other 
places, acquaintance with those who were most distinguished in 
that country, among whom he has celebrated Mr. Powel and Mrs. 
Jones, by some verses which he inserted in <cite>The Gentleman's 
Magazine</cite>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[279]</span> Here he completed his tragedy, 
of which two acts were wanting when he left London, and was 
desirous of coming to town to bring it upon the stage. This 
design was very warmly opposed, and he was advised by his chief 
benefactor to put it into the hands of Mr. Thomson and Mr. 
Mallet, that it might be fitted for the stage, and to allow his 
friends to receive the profits, out of which an annual pension 
should be paid him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[280]</span> This proposal he rejected with 
the utmost contempt. He was by no means convinced that the 
judgement of those, to whom he was required to submit, was 
superior to his own. He was now determined, as he expressed it, 
to be &ldquo;no longer kept in leading-strings,&rdquo; and had no 
elevated idea of &ldquo;his bounty, who proposed to pension him 
out of the profits of his own labours.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[281]</span> He attempted in Wales to 
promote a subscription for his works, and had once hopes of 
success; but in a short time afterwards formed a resolution of 
leaving that part of the country, to which he thought it not 
reasonable to be confined for the gratification of those who, 
having promised him a liberal income, had no sooner banished him 
to a remote corner than they reduced his allowance to a salary 
scarcely equal to the necessities of life.</p>

<p><span class="par">[282]</span> His resentment of this 
treatment, which, in his own opinion at least, he had not 
deserved, was such that he broke off all correspondence with most 
of his contributors, and appeared to consider them as persecutors 
and oppressors; and in the latter part of his life declared that 
their conduct toward him, since his departure from London, had 
&ldquo;been perfidiousness improving on perfidiousness, and 
inhumanity on inhumanity.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[283]</span> It is not to be supposed that 
the necessities of Mr. Savage did not sometimes incite him to 
satirical exaggerations of the behaviour of those by whom he 
thought himself reduced to them. But it must be granted that the 
diminution of his allowance was a great hardship, and that those 
who withdrew their subscription from a man who, upon the faith of 
their promise, had gone into a kind of banishment, and abandoned 
all those by whom he had been before relieved in his distresses, 
will find it no easy task to vindicate their conduct.</p>

<p><span class="par">[284]</span> It may be alleged, and perhaps 
justly, that he was petulant and contemptuous; that he more 
frequently reproached his subscribers for not giving him more, 
than thanked them for what he received; but it is to be 
remembered that his conduct, and this is the worst charge that 
can be drawn up against him, did them no real injury, and that it 
therefore ought rather to have been pitied than resented; at 
least, the resentment it might provoke ought to have been 
generous and manly: epithets which his conduct will hardly 
deserve that starves the man whom he has persuaded to put himself 
into his power.</p>

<p><span class="par">[285]</span> It might have been reasonably 
demanded by Savage that they should, before they had taken away 
what they promised, have replaced him in his former state, that 
they should have taken no advantages from the situation to which 
the appearance of their kindness had reduced him, and that he 
should have been recalled to London before he was abandoned. He 
might justly represent that he ought to have been considered as a 
lion in the toils, and demand to be released before the dogs 
should be loosed upon him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[286]</span> He endeavoured, indeed, to 
release himself, and, with an intent to return to London, went to 
Bristol, where a repetition of the kindness which he had formerly 
found invited him to stay. He was not only caressed and treated, 
but had a collection made for him of about thirty pounds, with 
which it had been happy if he had immediately departed for 
London; but his negligence did not suffer him to consider that 
such proofs of kindness were not often to be expected, and that 
this ardour of benevolence was in a great degree the effect of 
novelty, and might, probably, be every day less; and therefore he 
took no care to improve the happy time, but was encouraged by one 
favour to hope for another, till at length generosity was 
exhausted and officiousness wearied.</p>

<p><span class="par">[287]</span> Another part of his misconduct 
was the practice of prolonging his visits to unseasonable hours, 
and disconcerting all the families into which he was admitted. 
This was an error in a place of commerce which all the charms of 
his conversation could not compensate; for what trader would 
purchase such airy satisfaction by the loss of solid gain, which 
must be the consequence of midnight merriment, as those hours 
which were gained at night were generally lost in the 
morning?</p>

<p><span class="par">[288]</span> Thus Mr. Savage, after the 
curiosity of the inhabitants was gratified, found the number of 
his friends daily decreasing, perhaps without suspecting for what 
reason their conduct was altered; for he still continued to 
harass with his nocturnal intrusions those that yet countenanced 
him and admitted him to their houses.</p>

<p><span class="par">[289]</span> But he did not spend all the 
time of his residence at Bristol in visits or at taverns, for he 
sometimes returned to his studies, and began several considerable 
designs. When he felt an inclination to write he always retired 
from the knowledge of his friends, and lay hid in an obscure part 
of the suburbs till he found himself again desirous of company, 
to which it is likely that intervals of absence made him more 
welcome.</p>

<p><span class="par">[290]</span> He was always full of his 
design of returning to London to bring his tragedy upon the 
stage; but, having neglected to depart with the money that was 
raised for him, he could not afterwards procure a sum sufficient 
to defray the expences of his journey: nor perhaps would a fresh 
supply have had any other effect than, by putting immediate 
pleasures in his power, to have driven the thoughts of his 
journey out of his mind.</p>

<p><span class="par">[291]</span> While he was thus spending the 
day in contriving a scheme for the morrow, distress stole upon 
him by imperceptible degrees. His conduct had already wearied 
some of those who were at first enamoured of his conversation; 
but he might, perhaps, still have devolved to others, whom he 
might have entertained with equal success, had not the decay of 
his clothes made it no longer consistent with their vanity to 
admit him to their tables or to associate with him in publick 
places. He now began to find every man from home at whose house 
he called; and was therefore no longer able to procure the 
necessaries of life, but wandered about the town, slighted and 
neglected, in quest of a dinner, which he did not always 
obtain.</p>

<p><span class="par">[292]</span> To complete his misery he was 
pursued by the officers for small debts which he had contracted; 
and was therefore obliged to withdraw from the small number of 
friends from whom he had still reason to hope for favours. His 
custom was to lie in bed the greatest part of the day and to go 
out in the dark with the utmost privacy, and after having paid 
his visit return again before morning to his lodging, which was 
in the garret of an obscure inn.</p>

<p><span class="par">[293]</span> Being thus excluded on one 
hand, and confined on the other, he suffered the utmost 
extremities of poverty, and often fasted so long that he was 
seized with faintness, and had lost his appetite, not being able 
to bear the smell of meat till the action of his stomach was 
restored by a cordial.</p>

<p><span class="par">[294]</span> In this distress he received a 
remittance of five pounds from London, with which he provided 
himself a decent coat, and determined to go to London, but 
unhappily spent his money at a favourite tavern. Thus was he 
again confined to Bristol, where he was every day hunted by 
bailiffs. In this exigence he once more found a friend, who 
sheltered him in his house, though at the usual inconveniences 
with which his company was attended; for he could neither be 
persuaded to go to bed in the night nor to rise in the day.</p>

<p><span class="par">[295]</span> It is observable that in these 
various scenes of misery he was always disengaged and cheerful: 
he at some times pursued his studies, and at others continued or 
enlarged his epistolary correspondence; nor was he ever so far 
dejected as to endeavour to procure an increase of his allowance 
by any other methods than accusations and reproaches.</p>

<p><span class="par">[296]</span> He had now no longer any hopes 
of assistance from his friends at Bristol, who as merchants, and 
by consequence sufficiently studious of profit, cannot be 
supposed to have looked with much compassion upon negligence and 
extravagance, or to think any excellence equivalent to a fault of 
such consequence as neglect of oeconomy. It is natural to imagine 
that many of those who would have relieved his real wants were 
discouraged from the exertion of their benevolence by observation 
of the use which was made of their favours, and conviction that 
relief would only be momentary, and that the same necessity would 
quickly return.</p>

<p><span class="par">[297]</span> At last he quitted the house of 
his friend, and returned to his lodging at the inn, still 
intending to set out in a few days for London; but on the 10th of 
January, 1742-3, having been at supper with two of his friends, 
he was at his return to his lodgings arrested for a debt of about 
eight pounds, which he owed at a coffee-house, and conducted to 
the house of a sheriff's officer. The account which he gives of 
this misfortune, in a letter to one of the gentlemen with whom he 
had supped, is too remarkable to be omitted.</p>

<blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[298]</span> &ldquo;It was not a little 
unfortunate for me that I spent yesterday's evening with you, 
because the hour hindered me from entering on my new lodging; 
however, I have now got one, but such an one as I believe nobody 
would chuse.</p>

<p><span class="par">[299]</span> &ldquo;I was arrested at the 
suit of Mrs. Read, just as I was going up stairs to bed, at Mr. 
Bowyer's; but taken in so private a manner that I believe nobody 
at the White Lion is apprised of it. Though I let the officers 
know the strength (or rather weakness) of my pocket, yet they 
treated me with the utmost civility; and even when they conducted 
me to confinement, 'twas in such a manner that I verily believe I 
could have escaped, which I would rather be ruined than have 
done, notwithstanding the whole amount of my finances was but 
three pence halfpenny.</p>

<p><span class="par">[300]</span> &ldquo;In the first place I 
must insist that you will industriously conceal this from Mrs. 
S&mdash;&mdash;s, because I would not have her good-nature suffer 
that pain, which, I know, she would be apt to feel on this 
occasion.</p>

<p><span class="par">[301]</span> &ldquo;Next, I conjure you, 
dear Sir, by all the ties of friendship, by no means to have one 
uneasy thought on my account, but to have the same pleasantry of 
countenance and unruffled serenity of mind, which (God be 
praised!) I have in this, and have had in a much severer 
calamity. Furthermore I charge you, if you value my friendship as 
truly as I do yours, not to utter, or even harbour, the least 
resentment against Mrs. Read. I believe she has ruined me, but I 
freely forgive her; and (though I will never more have any 
intimacy with her) I would, at a due distance, rather do her an 
act of good, than ill will. Lastly (pardon the expression), I 
absolutely command you not to offer me any pecuniary assistance, 
nor to attempt getting me any from any one of your friends. At 
another time, or on any other occasion, you may, dear friend, be 
well assured, I would rather write to you in the submissive style 
of a request, than that of a peremptory command.</p>

<p><span class="par">[302]</span> &ldquo;However, that my truly 
valuable friend may not think I am too proud to ask a favour, let 
me entreat you to let me have your boy to attend me for this day, 
not only for the sake of saving me the expence of porters, but 
for the delivery of some letters to people whose names I would 
not have known to strangers.</p>

<p><span class="par">[303]</span> &ldquo;The civil treatment I 
have thus far met from those whose prisoner I am, makes me 
thankful to the Almighty that, though he has thought fit to visit 
me (on my birth-night) with affliction, yet (such is his great 
goodness!) my affliction is not without alleviating 
circumstances. I murmur not; but am all resignation to the divine 
will. As to the world, I hope that I shall be endued by Heaven 
with that presence of mind, that serene dignity in misfortune, 
that constitutes the character of a true nobleman: a dignity far 
beyond that of coronets; a nobility arising from the just 
principles of philosophy, refined and exalted by those of 
christianity.&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[304]</span> He continued five days at the 
officer's, in hopes that he should be able to procure bail, and 
avoid the necessity of going to prison. The state in which he 
passed his time and the treatment which he received are very 
justly expressed by him in a letter which he wrote to a friend:

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;The whole day,&rdquo; says he, &ldquo;has been employed 
in various people's filling my head with their foolish chimerical 
systems, which has obliged me coolly (as far as nature will 
admit) to digest, and accommodate myself to, every different 
person's way of thinking; hurried from one wild system to another 
till it has quite made a chaos of my imagination, and nothing 
done &mdash; promised &mdash; disappointed &mdash; ordered to 
send, every hour, from one part of the town to the 
other.&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[305]</span> When his friends, who had 
hitherto caressed and applauded, found that to give bail and pay 
the debt was the same, they all refused to preserve him from a 
prison at the expence of eight pounds; and therefore, after 
having been for some time at the officer's house, &ldquo;at an 
immense expence,&rdquo; as he observes in his letter, he was at 
length removed to Newgate.</p>

<p><span class="par">[306]</span> This expence he was enabled to 
support by the generosity of Mr. Nash at Bath, who, upon 
receiving from him an account of his condition, immediately sent 
him five guineas, and promised to promote his subscription at 
Bath with all his interest.</p>

<p><span class="par">[307]</span> By his removal to Newgate he 
obtained at least a freedom from suspense, and rest from the 
disturbing vicissitudes of hope and disappointment: he now found 
that his friends were only companions, who were willing to share 
his gaiety, but not to partake of his misfortunes; and therefore 
he no longer expected any assistance from them.</p>

<p><span class="par">[308]</span> It must, however, be observed 
of one gentleman that he offered to release him by paying the 
debt; but that Mr. Savage would not consent, I suppose because he 
thought he had been before too burthensome to him.</p>

<p><span class="par">[309]</span> He was offered by some of his 
friends that a collection should be made for his enlargement; but 
he &ldquo;treated the proposal,&rdquo; and declared &ldquo;he 
should again treat it, with disdain. As to writing any mendicant 
letters, he had too high a spirit, and determined only to write 
to some ministers of state, to try to regain his 
pension.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[310]</span> He continued to complain of 
those that had sent him into the country, and objected to them 
that he had &ldquo;lost the profits of his play, which had been 
finished three years&rdquo;; and in another letter declares his 
resolution to publish a pamphlet that the world might know how 
&ldquo;he had been used.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[311]</span> This pamphlet was never 
written; for he in a very short time recovered his usual 
tranquillity, and cheerfully applied himself to more inoffensive 
studies. He indeed steadily declared that he was promised a 
yearly allowance of fifty pounds, and never received half the 
sum; but he seemed to resign himself to that as well as to other 
misfortunes, and lose the remembrance of it in his amusements and 
employments.</p>

<p><span class="par">[312]</span> The cheerfulness with which he 
bore his confinement appears from the following letter, which he 
wrote, January the 30th, to one of his friends in London:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;I now write to you from my confinement in Newgate, 
where I have been ever since Monday last was se'nnight, and where 
I enjoy myself with much more tranquillity than I have known for 
upwards of a twelvemonth past; having a room entirely to myself, 
and pursuing the amusement of my poetical studies uninterrupted, 
and agreeable to my mind. I thank the Almighty, I am now all 
collected in myself; and, though my person is in confinement, my 
mind can expatiate on ample and useful subjects with all the 
freedom imaginable. I am now more conversant with the Nine than 
ever, and if, instead of a Newgate-bird, I may be allowed to be a 
bird of the Muses, I assure you, Sir, I sing very freely in my 
cage; sometimes indeed in the plaintive notes of the nightingale, 
but, at others, in the cheerful strains of the lark.&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[313]</span> In another letter he observes 
that he ranges from one subject to another without confining 
himself to any particular task; and that he was employed one week 
upon one attempt, and the next upon another.</p>

<p><span class="par">[314]</span> Surely the fortitude of this 
man deserves, at least, to be mentioned with applause; and, 
whatever faults may be imputed to him, the virtue of suffering 
well cannot be denied him. The two powers which, in the opinion 
of Epictetus, constituted a wise man are those of bearing and 
forbearing, which cannot indeed be affirmed to have been equally 
possessed by Savage; and indeed the want of one obliged him very 
frequently to practise the other.</p>

<p><span class="par">[315]</span> He was treated by Mr. Dagg, the 
keeper of the prison, with great humanity; was supported by him 
at his own table without any certainty of recompence; had a room 
to himself, to which he could at any time retire from all 
disturbance; was allowed to stand at the door of the prison, and 
sometimes taken out into the fields: so that he suffered fewer 
hardships in prison than he had been accustomed to undergo in the 
greatest part of his life.</p>

<p><span class="par">[316]</span> The keeper did not confine his 
benevolence to a gentle execution of his office, but made some 
overtures to the creditor for his release, though without effect; 
and continued, during the whole time of his imprisonment, to 
treat him with the utmost tenderness and civility.</p>

<p><span class="par">[317]</span> Virtue is undoubtedly most 
laudable in that state which makes it most difficult, and 
therefore the humanity of a gaoler certainly deserves this 
publick attestation; and the man, whose heart has not been 
hardened by such an employment, may be justly proposed as a 
pattern of benevolence. If an inscription was once engraved 
&ldquo;to the honest toll-gatherer,&rdquo; less honours ought not 
to be paid &ldquo;to the tender gaoler.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[318]</span> Mr. Savage very frequently 
received visits, and sometimes presents, from his acquaintances: 
but they did not amount to a subsistence, for the greater part of 
which he was indebted to the generosity of this keeper; but these 
favours, however they might endear to him the particular persons 
from whom he received them, were very far from impressing upon 
his mind any advantageous ideas of the people of Bristol, and 
therefore he thought he could not more properly employ himself in 
prison than in writing a poem called <cite>London and Bristol 
delineated</cite>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[319]</span> When he had brought this poem 
to its present state, which, without considering the chasm, is 
not perfect, he wrote to London an account of his design, and 
informed his friend that he was determined to print it with his 
name; but enjoined him not to communicate his intention to his 
Bristol acquaintance. The gentleman, surprised at his resolution, 
endeavoured to dissuade him from publishing it, at least from 
prefixing his name; and declared that he could not reconcile the 
injunction of secrecy with his resolution to own it at its first 
appearance. To this Mr. Savage returned an answer agreeable to 
his character in the following terms:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;I received yours this morning; and not without a little 
surprise at the contents. To answer a question with a question, 
you ask me concerning London and Bristol, Why will I add 
delineated? Why did Mr. Woolaston add the same word to his 
<cite>Religion of Nature</cite>? I suppose that it was his will 
and pleasure to add it in his case; and it is mine to do so in my 
own. You are pleased to tell me that you understand not why 
secrecy is enjoined, and yet I intend to set my name to it. My 
answer is &mdash; I have my private reasons, which I am not 
obliged to explain to any one. You doubt my friend Mr. 
S&mdash;&mdash; would not approve of it &mdash; And what is it to 
me whether he does or not? Do you imagine that Mr. 
S&mdash;&mdash; is to dictate to me? If any man who calls himself 
my friend should assume such an air, I would spurn at his 
friendship with contempt. You say, I seem to think so by not 
letting him know it &mdash; And suppose I do, what then? Perhaps 
I can give reasons for that disapprobation very foreign from what 
you would imagine. You go on in saying, Suppose I should not put 
my name to it &mdash; My answer is, that I will not suppose any 
such thing, being determined to the contrary: neither, Sir, would 
I have you suppose that I applied to you for want of another 
press: nor would I have you imagine that I owe Mr. 
S&mdash;&mdash; obligations which I do not.&rdquo;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[320]</span> Such was his imprudence, and 
such his obstinate adherence to his own resolutions, however 
absurd. A prisoner! supported by charity! and, whatever insults 
he might have received during the latter part of his stay in 
Bristol, once caressed, esteemed, and presented with a liberal 
collection, he could forget on a sudden his danger and his 
obligations, to gratify the petulance of his wit, or the 
eagerness of his resentment, and publish a satire, by which he 
might reasonably expect that he should alienate those who then 
supported him, and provoke those whom he could neither resist nor 
escape.</p>

<p><span class="par">[321]</span> This resolution, from the 
execution of which it is probable that only his death could have 
hindered him, is sufficient to shew how much he disregarded all 
considerations that opposed his present passions, and how readily 
he hazarded all future advantages for any immediate 
gratifications. Whatever was his predominant inclination, neither 
hope nor fear hindered him from complying with it; nor had 
opposition any other effect than to heighten his ardour, and 
irritate his vehemence.</p>

<p><span class="par">[322]</span> This performance was, however, 
laid aside while he was employed in soliciting assistance from 
several great persons, and one interruption succeeding another 
hindered him from supplying the chasm, and perhaps from 
retouching the other parts, which he can hardly be imagined to 
have finished in his own opinion; for it is very unequal, and 
some of the lines are rather inserted to rhyme to others than to 
support or improve the sense: but the first and last parts are 
worked up with great spirit and elegance.</p>

<p><span class="par">[323]</span> His time was spent in the 
prison for the most part in study, or in receiving visits, but 
sometimes he descended to lower amusements, and diverted himself 
in the kitchen with the conversation of the criminals; for it was 
not pleasing to him to be much without company, and though he was 
very capable of a judicious choice he was often contented with 
the first that offered: for this he was sometimes reproved by his 
friends, who found him surrounded with felons; but the reproof 
was on that, as on other occasions, thrown away: he continued to 
gratify himself, and to set very little value on the opinion of 
others.</p>

<p><span class="par">[324]</span> But here, as in every other 
scene of his life, he made use of such opportunities as occurred 
of benefiting those who were more miserable than himself, and was 
always ready to perform any office of humanity to his 
fellow-prisoners.</p>

<p><span class="par">[325]</span> He had now ceased from 
corresponding with any of his subscribers except one, who yet 
continued to remit him the twenty pounds a year which he had 
promised him, and by whom it was expected that he would have been 
in a very short time enlarged, because he had directed the keeper 
to enquire after the state of his debts.</p>

<p><span class="par">[326]</span> However, he took care to enter 
his name according to the forms of the court, that the creditor 
might be obliged to make him some allowance if he was continued a 
prisoner, and when on that occasion he appeared in the hall was 
treated with very unusual respect.</p>

<p><span class="par">[327]</span> But the resentment of the city 
was afterwards raised by some accounts that had been spread of 
the satire, and he was informed that some of the merchants 
intended to pay the allowance which the law required, and to 
detain him a prisoner at their own expence. This he treated as an 
empty menace; and perhaps might have hastened the publication, 
only to shew how much he was superior to their insults, had not 
all his schemes been suddenly destroyed.</p>

<p><span class="par">[328]</span> When he had been six months in 
prison he received from one of his friends, in whose kindness he 
had the greatest confidence and on whose assistance he chiefly 
depended, a letter that contained a charge of very atrocious 
ingratitude, drawn up in such terms as sudden resentment 
dictated. Henley, in one of his advertisements, had mentioned 
&ldquo;Pope's treatment of Savage.&rdquo; This was supposed by 
Pope to be the consequence of a complaint made by Savage to 
Henley, and was therefore mentioned by him with much resentment. 
Mr. Savage returned a very solemn protestation of his innocence, 
but, however, appeared much disturbed at the accusation. Some 
days afterwards he was seized with a pain in his back and side, 
which, as it was not violent, was not suspected to be dangerous; 
but growing daily more languid and dejected on the 25th of July 
he confined himself to his room, and a fever seized his spirits. 
The symptoms grew every day more formidable, but his condition 
did not enable him to procure any assistance. The last time that 
the keeper saw him was on July the 31st, 1743, when Savage, 
seeing him at his bed-side, said, with an uncommon earnestness, 
&ldquo;I have something to say to you, Sir&rdquo;; but, after a 
pause, moved his hand in a melancholy manner, and, finding 
himself unable to recollect what he was going to communicate, 
said, &ldquo;'Tis gone!&rdquo; The keeper soon after left him; 
and the next morning he died. He was buried in the churchyard of 
St. Peter, at the expence of the keeper.</p>

<p><span class="par">[329]</span> Such were the life and death of 
Richard Savage, a man equally distinguished by his virtues and 
vices; and at once remarkable for his weaknesses and 
abilities.</p>

<p><span class="par">[330]</span> He was of a middle stature, of 
a thin habit of body, a long visage, coarse features, and 
melancholy aspect; of a grave and manly deportment, a solemn 
dignity of mien, but which, upon a nearer acquaintance, softened 
into an engaging easiness of manners. His walk was slow, and his 
voice tremulous and mournful. He was easily excited to smiles, 
but very seldom provoked to laughter.</p>

<p><span class="par">[331]</span> His mind was in an uncommon 
degree vigorous and active. His judgement was accurate, his 
apprehension quick, and his memory so tenacious that he was 
frequently observed to know what he had learned from others in a 
short time, better than those by whom he was informed; and could 
frequently recollect incidents with all their combination of 
circumstances, which few would have regarded at the present time, 
but which the quickness of his apprehension impressed upon him. 
He had the peculiar felicity that his attention never deserted 
him: he was present to every object, and regardful of the most 
trifling occurrences. He had the art of escaping from his own 
reflections, and accommodating himself to every new scene.</p>

<p><span class="par">[332]</span> To this quality is to be 
imputed the extent of his knowledge, compared with the small time 
which he spent in visible endeavours to acquire it. He mingled in 
cursory conversation with the same steadiness of attention as 
others apply to a lecture; and, amidst the appearance of 
thoughtless gaiety, lost no new idea that was started, nor any 
hint that could be improved. He had therefore made in 
coffee-houses the same proficiency as others in their closets; 
and it is remarkable that the writings of a man of little 
education and little reading have an air of learning scarcely to 
be found in any other performances, but which perhaps as often 
obscures as embellishes them.</p>

<p><span class="par">[333]</span> His judgement was eminently 
exact both with regard to writings and to men. The knowledge of 
life was indeed his chief attainment; and it is not without some 
satisfaction that I can produce the suffrage of Savage in favour 
of human nature, of which he never appeared to entertain such 
odious ideas as some, who perhaps had neither his judgement nor 
experience, have published, either in ostentation of their 
sagacity, vindication of their crimes, or gratification of their 
malice.</p>

<p><span class="par">[334]</span> His method of life particularly 
qualified him for conversation, of which he knew how to practise 
all the graces. He was never vehement or loud, but at once modest 
and easy, open and respectful; his language was vivacious and 
elegant, and equally happy upon grave or humourous subjects. He 
was generally censured for not knowing when to retire, but that 
was not the defect of his judgement, but of his fortune; when he 
left his company he was frequently to spend the remaining part of 
the night in the street, or at least was abandoned to gloomy 
reflections, which it is not strange that he delayed as long as 
he could; and sometimes forgot that he gave others pain to avoid 
it himself.</p>

<p><span class="par">[335]</span> It cannot be said that he made 
use of his abilities for the direction of his own conduct: an 
irregular and dissipated manner of life had made him the slave of 
every passion that happened to be excited by the presence of its 
object, and that slavery to his passions reciprocally produced a 
life irregular and dissipated. He was not master of his own 
motions, nor could promise any thing for the next day.</p>

<p><span class="par">[336]</span> With regard to his oeconomy 
nothing can be added to the relation of his life. He appeared to 
think himself born to be supported by others, and dispensed from 
all necessity of providing for himself; he therefore never 
prosecuted any scheme of advantage, nor endeavoured even to 
secure the profits which his writings might have afforded him. 
His temper was, in consequence of the dominion of his passions, 
uncertain and capricious: he was easily engaged, and easily 
disgusted; but he is accused of retaining his hatred more 
tenaciously than his benevolence.</p>

<p><span class="par">[337]</span> He was compassionate both by 
nature and principle, and always ready to perform offices of 
humanity; but when he was provoked (and very small offences were 
sufficient to provoke him), he would prosecute his revenge with 
the utmost acrimony till his passion had subsided.</p>

<p><span class="par">[338]</span> His friendship was therefore of 
little value; for though he was zealous in the support or 
vindication of those whom he loved, yet it was always dangerous 
to trust him, because he considered himself as discharged by the 
first quarrel from all ties of honour of gratitude, and would 
betray those secrets which, in the warmth of confidence, had been 
imparted to him. This practice drew upon him an universal 
accusation of ingratitude: nor can it be denied that he was very 
ready to set himself free from the load of an obligation, for he 
could not bear to conceive him self in a state of dependence; his 
pride being equally powerful with his other passions, and 
appearing in the form of insolence at one time, and of vanity at 
another. Vanity, the most innocent species of pride, was most 
frequently predominant: he could not easily leave off when he had 
once begun to mention himself or his works; nor ever read his 
verses without stealing his eyes from the page, to discover, in 
the faces of his audience, how they were affected with any 
favourite passage.</p>

<p><span class="par">[339]</span> A kinder name than that of 
vanity ought to be given to the delicacy with which he was always 
careful to separate his own merit from every other man's, and to 
reject that praise to which he had no claim. He did not forget, 
in mentioning his performances, to mark every line that had been 
suggested or amended; and was so accurate as to relate that he 
owed <cite>three words</cite> in <span class="sc">the 
Wanderer</span> to the advice of his friends.</p>

<p><span class="par">[340]</span> His veracity was questioned, 
but with little reason; his accounts, though not indeed always 
the same, were generally consistent. When he loved any man he 
suppressed all his faults; and, when he had been offended by him, 
concealed all his virtues: but his characters were generally 
true, so far as he proceeded; though it cannot be denied that his 
partiality might have sometimes the effect of falsehood.</p>

<p><span class="par">[341]</span> In cases indifferent he was 
zealous for virtue, truth, and justice: he knew very well the 
necessity of goodness to the present and future happiness of 
mankind; nor is there perhaps any writer who has less endeavoured 
to please by flattering the appetites or perverting the 
judgement.</p>

<p><span class="par">[342]</span> As an author therefore, and he 
now ceases to influence mankind in any other character, if one 
piece which he had resolved to suppress be excepted, he has very 
little to fear from the strictest moral or religious censure. And 
though he may not be altogether secure against the objections of 
the critick, it must, however, be acknowledged that his works are 
the productions of a genius truly poetical, and, what many 
writers who have been more lavishly applauded cannot boast, that 
they have an original air, which has no resemblance of any 
foregoing work; that the versification and sentiments have a cast 
peculiar to themselves, which no man can imitate with success, 
because what was nature in Savage would in another be 
affectation. It must be confessed that his descriptions are 
striking, his images animated, his fictions justly imagined, and 
his allegories artfully pursued; that his diction is elevated, 
though sometimes forced, and his numbers sonorous and majestick, 
though frequently sluggish and encumbered. Of his style, the 
general fault is harshness, and its general excellence is 
dignity; of his sentiments, the prevailing beauty is sublimity, 
and uniformity the prevailing defect.</p>

<p><span class="par">[343]</span> For his life or for his 
writings none, who candidly consider his fortune, will think an 
apology either necessary or difficult. If he was not always 
sufficiently instructed in his subject, his knowledge was at 
least greater than could have been attained by others in the same 
state. If his works were sometimes unfinished, accuracy cannot 
reasonably be exacted from a man oppressed with want, which he 
has no hope of relieving but by a speedy publication. The 
insolence and resentment of which he is accused were not easily 
to be avoided by a great mind, irritated by perpetual hardships, 
and constrained hourly to return the spurns of contempt and 
repress the insolence of prosperity; and vanity may surely 
readily be pardoned in him, to whom life afforded no other 
comforts than barren praises, and the consciousness of deserving 
them.</p>

<p><span class="par">[344]</span> Those are no proper judges of 
his conduct who have slumbered away their time on the down of 
plenty, nor will any wise man presume to say, &ldquo;Had I been 
in Savage's condition, I should have lived or written better than 
Savage.&rdquo;</p>

<p><span class="par">[345]</span> This relation will not be 
wholly without its use if those who languish under any part of 
his sufferings shall be enabled to fortify their patience by 
reflecting that they feel only those afflictions from which the 
abilities of Savage did not exempt him; or those who, in 
confidence of superior capacities or attainments, disregard the 
common maxims of life, shall be reminded that nothing will supply 
the want of prudence, and that negligence and irregularity long 
continued will make knowledge useless, wit ridiculous, and genius 
contemptible.</p>

<!-- master.com.content -->

</body>

</html>
