
<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Between The Gods And Titans</TITLE>
<META NAME="Description" CONTENT="Article by Alain de Benoist">
<META NAME="KeyWords" CONTENT="Juenger, Ernst, Conservative Revolution, National Revolution, de Benoist, Alain">
</HEAD>
<BODY>
<FONT size="+2"><B><I>BETWEEN 
THE GODS AND THE TITANS</B></I></FONT>
<P><I>Alain de Benoist</I> considers the achievement of the writer Ernst Juenger 
and his ideal of the Worker in the context of the Conservative Revolution.
<P>This article first appeared as part of the central theme in <I>Nouvelle 
Ecole</I> No.40 (41, rue Barrault, 13 arr. 75 Paris) under the title <I>Ernst 
Juenger: La Figure du Travailleur entre les Dieux et les Titans</I>. We have 
translated it and are reprinting it in two parts in considerably abridged form 
with acknowledgements. Ernst Juenger is arguably the most provocative of all the 
writers of the Conservative Revolution. (Among other remarks attributed to him 
is the one that the abolition of torture is an indication of decadence in a 
society.) Even his most provocative utterences have the intellectual virtue, 
however, of forcing his opponents to articulate their opposition to him in an 
intelligent manner. <I>Scorpion</I> readers able to read French may be 
interested to know that Alain de Benoist is the general editor responsible for 
the publication of a new series of French translations of the writers of the 
Conservative Revolution, published by Pardes, (B.P. 47, 45390 Puiseaux 45390 
France).
<P><I>FOR ARMIN MOHLER</I>, author of the classic manual on the German 
Conservative Revolution (<I>Die Konservative Revolution in Deutschland</I>), 
Ernst Juenger's <I>Der Arbeiter</I> was one of those which he "still could not 
pick up without his hands shaking". For Mohler <I>Der Arbeiter</I> is more than 
a philosophy, it is a work of poetry. The word is apt, above all if we consider 
that all poetry possesses an incipient quality: it simultaneously penetrates the 
world and unveils the divine. <I>Der Arbeiter</I> possesses a metaphysical 
quality which takes it far beyond the historical and political context in which 
it was written.
<P>Ernst Juenger was born on 28th March 1895 in Heidelberg, the son of Ernst 
Georg (1868-1943), a chemist and assistant to research chemist Viktor Meyer. He 
had one sister and five brothers, two of whom died very young. Juenger went to 
school in Hannover and Scwarzenberg, later in Brunswick and finally in Hannover 
again, as well as having attended Scharnhorst Realschule (secondary school). In 
1911 he joined the Wunstdorf section of the <I>Wandervogel</I> and in the same 
year published his first poem, <I>Unser Leben</I>, in their local journal. In 
1913 he left home to sign up at Verdun for the French Foreign Legion. After a 
few months, when the young man had already begun training in Algeria, his father 
was able to persuade him to return to Germany, where he attended the Hannover 
Guild Institute. It was at this time that he became familiar with the works of 
Nietzsche.
<P>The First World War began for Germany on August 1st 1914 and Juenger signed 
up on the first day. He rose in the ranks to become lieutenant, was wounded 
three times before being awarded the Iron Cross First Class on December 16th 
1916. In February 1917 he became <I>Stosstruppfuehrer</I> (leader of an assault 
battalion). This led to the experience of hand-to-hand fighting in the trenches. 
Juenger was decorated with the <I>Ritterkreuz</I> of the Order of the 
Hohenzollerns. He finished the war in hospital, having been wounded fourteen 
times. Juenger was also awarded the Cross <I>Pour le merite</I>, the highest 
award in the German army. Only twelve subalterns in the German army received 
this award during the First World War, among the other eleven the future Marshal 
Rommel.
<P>Between 1918 and 1923, in the barracks at Hannover, Juenger began to write in 
earnest, inspired by his experiences at the front. <I>In Stahlgewittern</I> (In 
Hurricans of Steel), first published in 1919 and reedited in 1922, was an 
immediate success. There followed <I>Der Kampf als inneres Erlebnis</I> (1922) 
<I>Das Waeldchen 125</I> (1924) and <I>Feur und Blut</I> (1925) (The Fight 
within, Copse 125, Fire and Blood). Juenger also wrote on specialist military 
themes in <I>Militaer-Wochenblatt</I> and became known as something of an expert 
on military matters; but he did not feel at ease in a peacetime army. In 1923 he 
left the Reichswehr and entered Leipsic University to study biology, zoology and 
philosophy. In 1925 he married the 19 year old Gretha von Jeinsen. His political 
views developed rapidly in the political tumult of the time. In the space of a 
few months Juenger had become one of the principle representatives of the 
so-called national-revolutionaries of the Conservative Revolution. In September 
1925, a former commando leader, Helmut Franke, launched the review Die Standarte 
which set out to "contribute towards a spiritual deepening of the Front 
mentality". Juenger was on the editorial board along with another "nationalist 
soldier", Franz Schauwecker. The journal began life as a supplement to the 
magazine <I>Der Stahlhelm</I>, which was the organ of the Stahlhelm movement. 
(This was an active association of former combatants opposed to the Treaty of 
Versailles. In 1925 it had 250 thousand members. After the national socialists 
came to power in 1933, the association was forcibly amalgamated with the 
regime's official old combattants' organization (NSDFB) and by 1935 no trace of 
<I>Der Stahlhelm</I> remained.) In <I>Die Standarte</I> Juenger immediately 
adopted a radical tone, quite different to that of most of the Stahlhelm 
adherents. In an article published in October 1925, he criticised the theory of 
the "stab in the back" (<I>Dolchstoss</I>), which was accepted by almost all 
nationalists, namely that the German army was not defeated at the front but by a 
"stab in the back" at home. Juenger also pointed out that certain 
revolutionaries of the far left had fought in the war with distinction. This 
caused an uproar in <I>Die Stahhelm</I> and the movement distanced itself from 
the young writer. In March 1926 it closed down <I>Die Standarte</I>. Juenger 
started the magazine again a month later however with the same name, but 
dropping the "<I>Die</I>". Nevertheless, not all lines had been severed and 
<I>Standarte</I> was supported financially by several members of <I>Der 
Stahlhelm</I>. In the pages of <I>Standarte</I> on June 3rd 1926, Juenger made 
an appeal to all former soldiers to unite for the creation of a "Nationalist 
Workers' Republic". In August, Otto H&lt;148&gt;rsing, co-founder of the 
<I>Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot Gold</I>, the Social Democrats' security force, 
proposed to the government that the journal should be banned, which it was, but 
for only five months. Franz Seldte, the leader of <I>Der Stahlhelm</I> and still 
proprietor of the journal, took the opportunity to sack its leading editor, 
Helmut Franke. Juenger went with him. With Wilhelm Weiss the two launched 
another review, called Armenius. (<I>Standarte</I>, under different editorship, 
continued until 1929.) In 1927 Juenger moved from Leipsic to Berlin, where he 
made contact with the <I>Buendisch</I> youth. The Bunds were an attempt to unite 
the romantic spirit of the <I>Wandervogel</I> with an organization more 
permanent and hierarchical. Juenger became the leader (<I>Schirmherr</I>) of one 
of these youth groups. In 1927 Juenger was associated with the launching of yet 
another publication, <I>Der Vormarsch</I> (Advance) which was the brain-child of 
Captain Ehrhardt.
<P><I>"Losing the War to Win the Nation"</I>
<P>At this time Juenger was subject to several literary and philosophical 
influences. There was a French <I>fin de siecle</I> influence in his early 
works, notably <I>Der Kampf als innere Erlebnis</I> also a kind of Baudelairian 
dandyism in <I>Sturm</I>, a very early work. Mohler draws a comparison between 
Juenger and the Barres of <I>Roman de l'Energie nationale</I>: in the works of 
both writers nationalism is a substitute for religion, a manner of enlargening 
and strengthening the soul, the result of a conscious <I>choice</I>, a factor 
which emerged as a result of the destruction of old norms in the wake of the 
Great War. The influence of Spengler and Nietzsche is also evident. In 1929, in 
an interview given to an English journalist, Juenger defined himself as a 
"disciple of Nietzsche", stressing with approval the fact that Nietzsche was the 
first to challenge the fiction of an abstract universal man, by dividing mankind 
into the strong and the feeble. In 1922 Juenger read the first volume of <I>Der 
Untergang des Abendlandes</I> with great passion, but he was no passive disciple 
of Spengler, as we shall see. The experience of war, however, remained the 
strongest influence in Juenger's writings. He distinguished between the 
<I>Gegner</I> (opponent) and <I>Feind</I> (enemy); it is because there was not 
an absolute enemy but only the opponent of the moment, that the Great War and 
war as such has something "holy" about it.
<P>Another lesson which Juenger claimed to have learned was that "life is 
nourished by death" and that life, in its essence, is "indestructable". The war 
had been lost but this defeat had a potentially positive aspect, according to 
Juenger. Formal defeat or victory is not the "bottom line" in war. The aim is 
not the be all and end all of struggle. The war had not been so much a war 
between nations as between a certain kind of man. As an epigraph to his book 
<I>Aufbruch der Nation</I> (National Reveille) published in 1930, Franz 
Schauwecker wrote "we needed to lose the war in order to win the nation". 
Juenger had written in a similar vein. For Juenger after the Great War there 
could be "no going back". The old roads led nowhere. He called the Great War an 
<I>Umbruch</I>, an irreparable break with the past. The war had provided a model 
for the peace. War has a profound significance and the sacrifice of millions 
must have a meaning but the meaning can not be so much rationalised as 
<I>felt</I> (<I>geahnt</I>). From 1926 onwards, Juenger appealed incessantly for 
a united front of nationalist groups and movements. At the same time he tried, 
without notable success, to change them. Nationalism should become 
<I>revolutionary</I>. From this perspective the crux of the national struggle 
was the struggle against liberalism. In <I>Armenius</I> and in <I>Der 
Vormarsch</I> he attacked the humanists who favoured an "anaemic" society, the 
cynics who wished to see the Great War as nothing but futility and madness. At 
the same time he opposed the sentimentality of conservative nationalism ("the 
cult of museums") and distinguished between healthy neo-nationalism and the 
sentimentality of what he called "grand-daddy nationalism". The nation is more 
than a country, it is an <I>idea</I> and Germany exists there where the idea of 
Germany fires the spirit.
<P>In the April issue of <I>Arminius</I> Juenger took a nominalist position: for 
him there is no universal truth, no universal moral, no universal man with a 
just claim to equal rights. Value is found in the particular. While 
<I>Voelkisch</I> groups sought a return to the soil, Juenger on the contrary 
exalted the power of technics and repudiated the individual. Born of bourgeois 
rationality, technology was now going to turn on the spirit which had engendered 
it. As technology advances, so the individual will disappear. In the meantime 
the town had become the "front" in the national struggle and in Berlin 
representatives of many different currents of the Conservative Revolution met 
around Juenger, including the writer Ernst von Saloman, the Nietzschean 
Friedrich Hielscher, who was editor of <I>Das Reich</I>, the neo-conservatives 
August Winnig (whom Juenger met through Alfred Baeumler) and A.E. Guenther, 
co-editor with Wilhelm Stapel of <I>Deutsches Volkstum</I>, the 
national-Bolsheviks Ernst Niekisch and Karl Paetel and of course his own brother 
Friedrich Georg Juenger, who had become quite well known in his own right.
<P>In April 1928 Juenger handed over editorship of <I>Der Vormarsch</I> to 
Hielscher, who was a close friend of his. (Among other things Hielscher was the 
coordinator of a European regionalist movement and the founder of a neo-Pagan 
church. In the Third Reich he was to hold an important position in the 
<I>Ahnenerbe</I> while maintaining contact with the "internal immigration". He 
was arrested in September 1944 and thrown into prison and only escaped execution 
thanks to the special pleading of Wolfram Sievers, (most of whose writings, 
apart from an autobiography, have never been published.) In 1930 Juenger became, 
with Werner Lass, the editor of <I>Die Kommenden</I>, a point of contact with 
national-Bolsheviks, as these wrote regularly for the paper. He also wrote for 
<I>Widerstand</I> (Opposition) edited by Ernst Niekisch, whom he knew 
personally. For Niekisch the future man was collective man, who alone would be 
able to face up to the "murderous consequences" of technological discovery. The 
national movement and the communist movement had the same enemy: the bourgeois 
West. Although fascinated by Bolshevism, Juenger was at no time a 
national-Bolshevik. He and Lass left <I>Die Kommenden</I> in July 1931, Lass to 
found an out and out national-Bolshevik publication: <I>Der Umsturz</I> 
(Overthrow), but Juenger had not the least inclination to take part in this 
project, nor in the national-socialist movement. In an article written for 
<I>Suedeutsche Monatshefte</I> in September 1931 he included national-socialism 
among the nationalisms which were inspired by the past and therefore, according 
to him, tainted with liberal and bourgeois ideas. As Marcel Decombis noted in 
his work on Juenger published in 1943, "Juenger, the perfect Prussian officer, 
who subjects himself to the most intense self-discipline, could never submit 
again to a collectivity." His brother evolved politically in much the same 
direction. At that time they went on a number of voyages to Southern Europe 
together. From 1929 onwards, Juenger spent less time writing for publications 
and more on writing books. In 1929 the first version of <I>Das abenteurliche 
Herz</I> (Adventurous Heart) was published, followed by <I>Die totale 
Mobilmachung</I> (Total Mobilisation) in 1931 and <I>Der Arbeiter</I> (The 
Worker) in 1932.
<P><I>The Worker</I>
<P>The first part of the book revolves around the notion of what the writer 
called <I>Gestalt</I> (form, figure). This <I>Gestalt</I> is seen as a global 
type, of which the totality includes characteristics which can not be found in 
any of the separate constituent parts. It is at the root of <I>sense</I>, a 
supreme reality which gives sense to phenomena. Sense is not here intended to 
have exactly the meaning we associate with cause and effect, rather it is sense 
in being an imprint which marks a period in time and gives that period in time.. 
sense. Man here is the measure of all things. <I>Gestalt</I> is the "pre-formed 
power" (<I>vorgeformte Macht</I>) which only accedes to being to the extent that 
it is willed into being by man who feels its appeal. The <I>Gestalt</I> is not 
dependent on man to be what it is, but it does depend on man to assume the 
status of existence, which it endows with the dimesion of <I>profundity</I>. It 
can only be understood dialectically, for it encompasses many different aspects. 
It is at once unchanging and localised. Its relationship to history is complex: 
it is not so much the product of history as <I>what permits history to take 
place</I>. It determines historical <I>movement</I>. History does not bring 
forth historical types but is transformed through its interaction with them. 
(Juenger noted elsewhere that our epoch was rich in types but poor in great 
men.) History is the metaphysics of being. The <I>Gestalt</I> is beyond Good and 
Evil. Not only is it not subject to a morality, it alone makes morality 
possible. The same goes for Truth and Beauty. The role of the theorist is not 
therefore to judge a figure but instinctively to recognise it. To identify with 
it is to commit a revolutionary act.
<P>What is the dominant form of our time? Work, according to Juenger. It is 
therefore in the figure of the Worker that Juenger claimed to see the 
<I>Gestalt</I> of the generation to come. Juenger does not mean work as the key 
to economic activity or work as the "law of humanity", nor work as the 
consequence of original sin, nor does work here represent an "alienation". 
Juenger uses the term "work" to describe all creation which aims at <I>giving 
form</I> in the world; it is the affirmation of power, the deployment of energy. 
Work is the means by which the modern world is <I>totally mobilised</I>, the 
expression of a special form of being. Science, love, art, faith, culture, war: 
all is Work; Work too the vibration of molecules and the force which drives the 
stars and planets. Work is not so much an activity as the will which is "at 
work" within an activity, the "will to will", which is the creative force of 
history. The notion of the Worker as an economic creation is too restrictive and 
betrays the bourgeois reference frame of whoever sees Work in such a restrictive 
light. The Worker is not be confused with the proletariat, unless we conceive 
him as a "proletarian" within all classes. Juenger thus distinguishes sharply 
between the Worker's State as he saw it and the Marxian notion of "the workers' 
state". Against the Marxist <I>Arbeiterschaft</I> (work force), Juenger opposed 
the <I>Arbeitertum</I>, identification with work, the community of those 
dedicated to work. (This distinction was also made by August Winnig, notably in 
his <I>Der Glaube an das Proletariat</I> and <I>Vom Proletariat zum 
Arbeitertum</I>, but his stress was much more political in the practical sense 
of the word than Juenger's.) But Juenger himself stressed that his work was not 
anti-Marxist. Marx had his place in an understanding of the concept of the 
Worker, but that place should not be exclusive. Marxism, "useful because 
corrosive", had to be surpassed. Marx limited the notion of work to the economic 
field, but for Juenger work had a breadth which extended "from the atom to the 
galaxies". Marx believed that the worker would one day be transformed into an 
artist. Juenger believed that the artist was being transformed into a worker.
<P>The worker reveals himself by virtue of his <I>power</I>. He will dominate by 
virtue of his Will to Power, which is expressed through work, a work which 
succeedes in <I>mobilising</I>. The <I>Gestalt</I> represents the spirit of the 
world at a given period. The key to all is power, for behind the representations 
of spirit in the world are not pure ideas but matter. Contrary to what Hegel 
claimed, theory does not determine reality but on the contrary reality engenders 
ideas. Economy plays a secondary role for Juenger, as he underlined in an 
interview given to <I>Le Monde</I> (2oth June 1978). The figure of the Worker is 
metaphysical and in its fundamental character is not transformed. Juenger called 
the Worker a "titanic personage". The antithesis of the Worker is the Bourgeois; 
for Juenger, to be anti-liberal is to be first and foremost anti-bourgeois. The 
Bourgeois too is a <I>Gestalt</I> which encapsulates a mode of life and thought, 
a scale of values, a state of mind, which can be found in all classes, not just 
the middle-classes. The Bourgeois has no metaphsical worth, he only reasons in a 
utilitarian manner. The Bourgeois wants to take as much as possible from life 
and give as little as possible. Above all else the Bourgeois is worried about 
safety. The Bourgeois is represented by the type of person who is afraid of life 
and is who is incapable of acting historically. The Bourgeois avoids all 
commitment to the decisive, the creative act. War and love, nature and death, 
all the elementary forces are "irrational" to him and do not belong to his 
society, for society, as he sees it, is the result of a voluntarily made and 
rationally conceived contract based on the principle of equality for all. Worker 
and Bourgeois are as different as dawn and dusk.
<P>The advent of the figure of the Worker is linked to a new state of society 
which Juenger calls "total mobilisation" (<I>totale Mobilmachung</I>). This 
expression was clarified by Juenger in a long essay which served as a kind of 
preface to <I>Der Arbeiter</I>. It is the effects of the evolution of the 
techniques of war which heralds, in the most characteristic manner, entry into 
the era of total mobilisation. Since Clausewitz described the condition of 
"total war", the situation had rapidly evolved. Especially from 1916, the spirit 
of progress and the development of the techniques of war went hand in hand. 
Technology dominates the scene more and more. The Great War thus marked the end 
of the era of chivalry and traditional heroic values. From his own experience in 
the trenches, Juenger had seen the evolution of war into the pitting of abstract 
material force against abstract material force. The troops become canon fodder. 
War is impregnated with the same spirit as that which created the machines. 
Technical instruction becomes more and more crucial for every soldier. "...the 
men who march at the head, the tank drivers, the pilots, the U-boat captains, 
are all accomplished <I>technicians</I>." (<I>Waeldchen 125</I>) The technician 
then represents the modern state at war. The question must then be raised: in 
such a situation what meaning does the soldier's sacrifice have? The answer lies 
in the notion of total mobilisation. At the same time as war becomes a technical 
undertaking, the traditional distinction between combattant and non-combattant 
breaks down. Even the notion of war and peace gives way to the reality of 
permanent global conflict. Even the pacifist has to be ready to fight for his 
beliefs! The decisive aspect of the new state of affairs is the fact that all 
are potentially involved in war and all are available for mobilisation. The 
<I>capacity to mobilise</I> becomes increasingly the key factor in the destiny 
of peoples. Modern war has become an aspect of Work. The world as we know it is 
transformed into a universal factory, a "Vulcan's forge". The world is now 
mobile and mobilised. The Great War therefore exceeds the French Revolution in 
historical importance, for it has brought forth a new man, the man with a hammer 
in his hand. Worker and Soldier become one and the same. The military front and 
the industrial front are the same. The Great War also witnessed the emergence of 
the collectivist era (<I>Wirzeit</I>) as opposed to the individualistic one 
(<I>Ichzeit</I>). The rural world is in decline, motorways are built, leisure 
becomes an industry, political parties blossom, the screen takes precedence over 
the stage, the photograph over the portrait, national planning becomes very 
important, the value of money is controlled, production is standardised, 
statistics and typologies abound, the "metallic" (male) or "cosmetic" (female) 
fixidness of the face, the restrictions on individual liberty brought about by 
automation, the convergence of effort towards economic objectives which exceed 
their own frame of reference, the collaboration of state and industry: these 
among other factors accompany the replacement everywhere of the individual by 
the uniform and typical. In Juenger's eyes these factors are positive. His tone 
in evoking the power and importance of machines sometimes recalls Italian 
Futurism. The critic Henri Plard called <I>Der Arbeiter</I> "the richest and 
most provocative of his works", in which is allied "an effectively and 
passionately reactionary ideology with a modernism which clears all the dead 
wood of whatever is not 100% up-to-date." (<I>Etudes Germaniques</I> 
July-September 1979). The standardisation or uniformation of the world is taken 
as the bearing of a <I>uniform</I>. This is not a sign of decadence but a 
promise of the future and the precondition of the destruction of the Bourgeois 
type. The Worker must accelerate this process. The Worker arises as a result of 
the death of the individual. Only decomposition allows for recomposition at a 
higher level. The individual whose demise Juenger so joyously proclaims is not 
altogether identical with the individual <I>person</I>; rather it is the 
bourgeois individual, the <I>Individuum</I>, born of the philosophy of the 
Enlightenment, a creature struck from its roots, from its heritage, is in 
contrast with the <I>Einzelne</I>, the individual person, whose identity is 
situated in an "organic environment". The <I>Individuum</I> is "most charming 
invention of burgeois sentimentality..a part of the mass, which is the contrary 
of a people." So the individual is just "mass" in smaller letters. Work is 
indissociable from Liberty. Man puts most energy into something at a command. 
Liberty is a voluntary adhesion to a <I>Gestalt</I> in service to which the full 
capacity of the Worker is able to express itself. To be free means to <I>take 
part</I>, the will to be free is the will to work. Liberty presupposes a life 
filled with sense, an attachment rather than freedom from restraint. As a result 
of attaining liberty the Worker is able to realise his integration 
(<I>Eingliederung</I>) in the general structure of society through which the 
Worker is fully realised. Man is not to be considered as an individual but as an 
incarnation of <I>Gestalt</I> and attains liberty through participation in the 
attainment of the figure of which he is, as individual person, a representation. 
In the future society envisaged by Juenger, each person's place will not be 
determined by birth, fortune, or rank, but by the <I>degree of adhesion to the 
type of the Worker</I>.
<P>Clearly Juenger's thought has gone way beyond drawing from the experience of 
war. When he speaks of the war of material forces he is not only making an 
observation concerning the technological evolution of war, he is pointing to the 
idea that the technical transformation of war has produced a rupture which 
affects the entire planet. This rupture marks the end of the rule of man or gods 
made in the image of man, and the emergence of the titanic force of the 
elemental in daily life. Ancient religions tell us that at the origin of 
civilizations there was a struggle between Gods and Titans. For millennia the 
Titans held the Gods in awe and kept their distance but now it is the Twilight 
of the Gods and the Giants are returning. They are returning by means of the 
immense force which technology has unleashed. Confronted with the unchaining of 
the elemental, all the old defences, old attitudes, old doctrines are withered. 
Anachronistic too are the traditional forms of political action. Defeat must be 
turned into victory. Life must be <I>intensified</I> and the Worker will 
prevail.
<P>According to Julius Evola, "Juenger should be credited in this first stage of 
his thought, with having recognised the fatal error of thinking that all could 
be restored to what it was before, that the new world which was looming could be 
mastered or halted on the basis of a vision of a bygone era" (<I>Oriente e 
Occidente</I> Arche, Milan 1982 p.69) and, "man must become the instrument of 
the mechnical and yet at the same time master it, not only in the physical 
sense, but also spiritually. This is only possible in the context of a new human 
type...a being more the subject than the object, one who accepts those aspects 
of destruction which lead to a surmounting of individualism in favour of a new 
active impersonalism, towards a "heroic realism"." (<I>Il cammino del 
cinabro,</I> Arche, Milan 1983 pp. 99 191-192). What is important for man, 
according to Juenger, is neither happiness nor wealth. It is to enter into a 
state of resonance with respect to the Figure which is the way to achieve 
determination, destiny, a discovery which endowes sacrifice with a meaning. The 
Worker considers the military <I>esprit de corps</I> as nothing exceptional: for 
him it is the discipline on which he bases his whole life and therein lies his 
innate superiority. The great force of heroic realism is to be able to face 
anything, even the certainty of failure with equananimity: nothing can shake the 
resolve of the Worker. This equananimity is not to be confused with fatalism, it 
does not preclude the will to action. On the contrary, it provides a lucidity 
which stimulates action. The key notion of movement, of not being passive, 
recalls Nietsche's <I>amor fati</I> or Evola's "riding the tiger". Not life in 
itself is important but the nobility of life, that we can lead a life in the 
"grand style". The Worker gives <I>form</I> to a chaotic world. The Worker is a 
demi-urge.
<P>Whether one welcomes it or not, the Worker's day will come. For Juenger force 
will solve many future problems and will resolve, in the most radical way, many 
of the tensions of society. The Worker must mobilise, that is to say, be 
prepared to act forcibly and to be mobile, swift to take advantage of the 
technical opportunities opening up, the source of the creation of the modern 
Worker in the first place. Only the Worker is capable of an authentic rapport 
with the "totalistic character of work", of a genuine relationship with the 
machine. Being as revealed in the Worker as <I>Gestalt</I> and the essence of 
the machine is The Will to Power. Technics constitute not only the "symbol of 
the figure of the Worker" but also the "manner in which that figure mobilises 
the world". And technology is not here to accelerate progress but to 
<I>intensify power</I>. Not only progress, but also the notion of the "infinite 
possibilities of technological development" are illusions. Technology will reach 
a point of perfection which will mark the furthest stage it can reach, and as 
with all form, its perfection is reached at the point that it is used to the 
maximum extent of its inherent potential. At this point there is a difference to 
be noted between Ernst Juenger and his brother, Friedrich Georg Juenger. The 
idea of technical perfection in the sense of achievement and fulfillment 
(<I>Vollendung</I>), is one which the latter examines critically in his writings 
but which Ernst Juenger sees in a positive light, arguing that one day 
technology, reaching its amplitude, its perfection, will be able to dominate the 
entire world, but that this can only be realised by the coming to power of the 
non-individualist Worker.
<P>By rejecting the "myth of Progress", Juenger denies that technology is 
neutral, at the service of everyone, or that it is either intrinsically 
liberating or intrinsically oppressive. Technology enslaves those who are not 
adequate to cope with it and the form of life which it ushers in. The bourgeois 
mentality, on the other hand, is terrified of the Golom which it has created but 
is unable to master. Technology has its own langauge which the Worker is 
equipped to speak, but not the Bourgeois. Technology is a formation of the 
elementary forces of the world. This is the end of individualism. The 
"individual" will become a slave to the machine. The question, already posed by 
Juenger in <I>Feuer und Blut</I>, is whether man will dominate or be dominated 
by, his own inventions. Although Juenger rejects the notion that 
<I>biologically</I> race is important, but <I>metaphysically</I> technology 
calls forth a new elite and the will to form a new race (<I>Wille zur 
Rassenbildung</I>) and this new race must be "prudent, strong, shorn of 
equivocation, drunk with energy". Art will then become the "putting into form" 
(<I>Gestaltung</I>) of the world of Work. The advent of the Worker will herald 
the end of individualism and of proletarianism. It will reject the utopias of 
the materialists and the idealists and will interpret the world in its own 
image. Marxism and the old religions will all disappear.
<P>Just as technology can not be neutral, nor can the state. The supposed 
neutrality of the liberal bourgeois state is a sham. In opposition to 
parliamentary democracies and democratic socialists, Juenger opposes the 
"democracy of the state", a society with a pyramidal structure founded on the 
Prussian principles of command and obedience, but in which the leader is not a 
despot but the "first servant, the first soldier, the first worker". For the 
Worker liberty and obedience are one. This notion of the "total state" was 
distinguished by Evola from that of the "totalitarian state", the first being 
supple, living, organic and marking the beginning of a cycle, the second being 
moribund, inflexible, mechanised, petrified and representing the end of a cycle. 
Juenger's state was to be tripartite: the first level with an economic funtion 
and <I>passively</I> reflecting the <I>Gestalt</I> of the Worker; the second 
level with an administrative and instructive function and <I>actively</I> 
reflecting the <I>Gestalt</I> of the Worker; the third level being the 
<I>sovereign</I> level, whose action would directly reflect the totality of Work 
and whose imperial authority would represent the <I>Gestalt</I> in its "pure" 
form. This tripartite system appears to be an adaption of an ancient model of a 
social scheme which to a certain extent was also reflected in the old German 
tripartite system of <I>Staende</I>.
<P>In his work <I>Die Totale Mobilmachung</I> (Total Mobilisation) Juenger's 
perspective was essentially national: only the German people was capable of 
"affronting" itself, of undertaking a mobilisation of itself. It is in this 
sense that Juenger saw something positive emerging from the war for Germany: it 
gave Germany the opportunity to "realise itself". Mobilisation was to be 
mobilisation of everything which was German "and nothing else". In <I>Der 
Arbeiter</I>, on the other hand, Juenger abandoned the typical nationalist 
position in favour of a universal perspective. In the future the nations would 
become "planning areas" later to be followed by the rule of the Worker over the 
entire planet. The instauration of the Worker would signal the end of Western 
nihilism, for which the bourgeois system was responsible. The sovereignity of 
the "grand style" could only be realised on a global level. Man has reached the 
point where he must choose between mastering the world or renouncing his 
humanity.<P>

<A href="index.html">The Alain De Benoist Collection</A>
                                
</BODY></HTML>
