<html>

<head>

<title>Johnson&rsquo;s Plan of an English Dictionary</title>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="texts.css">

</head>

<body>

<h1 align="center">The Plan of an English Dictionary (1747)</h1>

<h2 align="center">By <a href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Johnson/">Samuel Johnson</a></h2>

<h3 align="center">Edited by <a
href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/">Jack Lynch</a></h3>

<div class="headnote">

<p>The text is scanned from Johnson&rsquo;s 1825 Oxford 
<em>Works</em>; for a sound scholarly text, check out the 
<cite>Yale Edition of the Works of Samuel Johnson</cite>, vol. 
18, <cite>Johnson on the English Language</cite>, but this should 
be good enough for classroom use.  A few obvious errors have been 
corrected. I&rsquo;ve indented extract quotations and reduced 
flush-right text to flush-left.</p>

<p>The curious may want to compare this <cite>Plan</cite> with 
the <a href="preface.html">preface</a> Johnson published in the 
<cite>Dictionary</cite> in 1755.</p>

<p>Please send suggestions and corrections to <a 
href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/contact.html">Jack 
Lynch</a>.</p>

</div>

<hr>

<p><strong>To the Right Honourable Philip Dormer, Earl of 
Chesterfield</strong>, One of his Majesty&rsquo;s principal 
Secretaries of State.</p>

<p><strong>My Lord</strong>,</p>

<p><span class="par">[1]</span> <strong>When</strong> first I 
undertook to write an English Dictionary, I had no expectation of 
any higher patronage than that of the proprietors of the copy, 
nor prospect of any other advantage than the price of my labour. 
I knew that the work in which I engaged is generally considered 
as drudgery for the blind, as the proper toil of artless 
industry; a task that requires neither the light of learning, nor 
the activity of genius, but may be successfully performed without 
any higher quality than that of bearing burdens with dull 
patience, and beating the track of the alphabet with sluggish 
resolution.</p>

<p><span class="par">[2]</span> Whether this opinion, so long 
transmitted, and so widely propagated, had its beginning from 
truth and nature, or from accident and prejudice; whether it be 
decreed by the authority of reason or the tyranny of ignorance, 
that, of all the candidates for literary praise, the unhappy 
lexicographer holds the lowest place, neither vanity nor interest 
incited me to inquire. It appeared that the province allotted me 
was, of all the regions of learning, generally confessed to be 
the least delightful, that it was believed to produce neither 
fruits nor flowers; and that, after a long and laborious 
cultivation, not even the barren laurel had been found upon 
it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[3]</span> Yet on this province, my Lord, I 
entered, with the pleasing hope, that, as it was low, it likewise 
would be safe. I was drawn forward with the prospect of 
employment, which, though not splendid, would be useful; and 
which, though it could not make my life envied, would keep it 
innocent; which would awaken no passion, engage me in no 
contention, nor throw in my way any temptation to disturb the 
quiet of others by censure, or my own by flattery.</p>

<p><span class="par">[4]</span> I had read, indeed, of times, in 
which princes and statesmen thought it part of their honour to 
promote the improvement of their native tongues; and in which 
dictionaries were written under the protection of greatness. To 
the patrons of such undertakings I willingly paid the homage of 
believing that they, who were thus solicitous for the perpetuity 
of their language, had reason to expect that their actions would 
be celebrated by posterity, and that the eloquence which they 
promoted would be employed in their praise. But I considered such 
acts of beneficence as prodigies, recorded rather to raise wonder 
than expectation; and, content with the terms that I had 
stipulated, had not suffered my imagination to flatter me with 
any other encouragement, when I found that my design had been 
thought by your Lordship of importance sufficient to attract your 
favour.</p>

<p><span class="par">[5]</span> How far this unexpected 
distinction can be rated among the happy incidents of life, I am 
not yet able to determine. Its first effect has been to make me 
anxious, lest it should fix the attention of the publick too much 
upon me; and, as it once happened to an epick poet of France, by 
raising the reputation of the attempt, obstruct the reception of 
the work. I imagine what the world will expect from a scheme, 
prosecuted under your Lordship&rsquo;s influence; and I know that 
expectation, when her wings are once expanded, easily reaches 
heights which performance never will attain; and when she has 
mounted the summit of perfection, derides her follower, who dies 
in the pursuit.</p>

<p><span class="par">[6]</span> Not, therefore, to raise 
expectation, but to repress it, I here lay before your Lordship 
the plan of my undertaking, that more may not be demanded than I 
intend; and that, before it is too far advanced to be thrown into 
a new method, I may be advertised of its defects or 
superfluities. Such informations I may justly hope, from the 
emulation with which those, who desire the praise of elegance or 
discernment, must contend in the promotion of a design that you, 
my Lord, have not thought unworthy to share your attention with 
treaties and with wars.</p>

<p><span class="par">[7]</span> In the first attempt to methodise 
my ideas I found a difficulty, which extended itself to the whole 
work. It was not easy to determine by what rule of distinction 
the words of this dictionary were to be chosen. The chief intent 
of it is to preserve the purity, and ascertain the meaning of our 
English idiom; and this seems to require nothing more than that 
our language be considered, so far as it is our own; that the 
words and phrases used in the general intercourse of life, or 
found in the works of those whom we commonly style polite 
writers, be selected, without including the terms of particular 
professions; since, with the arts to which they relate, they are 
generally derived from other nations, and are very often the same 
in all the languages of this part of the world. This is, perhaps, 
the exact and pure idea of a grammatical dictionary; but in 
lexicography, as in other arts, naked science is too delicate for 
the purposes of life. The value of a work must be estimated by 
its use; it is not enough that a dictionary delights the critick, 
unless, at the same time, it instructs the learner; as it is to 
little purpose that an engine amuses the philosopher by the 
subtilty of its mechanism, if it requires so much knowledge in 
its application as to be of no advantage to the common 
workman.</p>

<p><span class="par">[8]</span> The title which I prefix to my 
work has long conveyed a very miscellaneous idea, and they that 
take a dictionary into their hands, have been accustomed to 
expect from it a solution of almost every difficulty. If foreign 
words, therefore, were rejected, it could be little regarded, 
except by criticks, or those who aspire to criticism; and however 
it might enlighten those that write, would be all darkness to 
them that only read. The unlearned much oftener consult their 
dictionaries for the meaning of words, than for their structures 
or formations; and the words that most want explanation are 
generally terms of art; which, therefore, experience has taught 
my predecessors to spread with a kind of pompous luxuriance over 
their productions.</p>

<p><span class="par">[9]</span> The academicians of France, 
indeed, rejected terms of science in their first essay, but found 
afterwards a necessity of relaxing the rigour of their 
determination; and, though they would not naturalize them at once 
by a single act, permitted them by degrees to settle themselves 
among the natives, with little opposition; and it would surely be 
no proof of judgment to imitate them in an errour which they have 
now retracted, and deprive the book of its chief use, by 
scrupulous distinctions.</p>

<p><span class="par">[10]</span> Of such words, however, all are 
not equally to be considered as parts of our language; for some 
of them are naturalized and incorporated; but others still 
continue aliens, and are rather auxiliaries than subjects. This 
naturalization is produced either by an admission into common 
speech, in some metaphorical signification, which is the 
acquisition of a kind of property among us; as we say, the 
<em>zenith</em> of advancement, the <em>meridian</em> of life, 
the <em>cynosure</em> of neighbouring eyes; or it is the 
consequence of long intermixture and frequent use, by which the 
ear is accustomed to the sound of words, till their original is 
forgotten, as in <em>equator</em>, <em>satellites</em>; or of the 
change of a foreign to an English termination, and a conformity 
to the laws of the speech into which they are adopted; as in 
<em>category</em>, <em>cachexy</em>, <em>peripneumony</em>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[11]</span> Of those which still continue in 
the state of aliens, and have made no approaches towards 
assimilation, some seem necessary to be retained, because the 
purchasers of the Dictionary will expect to find them. Such are 
many words in the common law, as <em>capias</em>, <em>habeas 
corpus</em>, <em>pr&aelig;munire</em>, <em>nisi prius</em>: such 
are some terms of controversial divinity, as <em>hypostasis</em>; 
and of physick, as the names of diseases; and, in general, all 
terms which can be found in books not written professedly upon 
particular arts, or can be supposed necessary to those who do not 
regularly study them. Thus, when a reader not skilled in physick 
happens in Milton upon this line,</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&mdash;&mdash;pining atrophy,<br>
Marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence,</p>

</blockquote>

<p>he will, with equal expectation, look into his dictionary for 
the word <em>marasmus</em>, as for <em>atrophy</em>, or 
<em>pestilence</em>; and will have reason to complain if he does 
not find it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[12]</span> It seems necessary to the 
completion of a dictionary, designed not merely for criticks, but 
for popular use, that it should comprise, in some degree, the 
peculiar words of every profession; that the terms of war and 
navigation should be inserted, so far as they can be required by 
readers of travels, and of history; and those of law, 
merchandise, and mechanical trades, so far as they can be 
supposed useful in the occurrences of common life.</p>

<p><span class="par">[13]</span> But there ought, however, to be 
some distinction made between the different classes of words; 
and, therefore, it will be proper to print those which are 
incorporated into the language in the usual character, and those 
which are still to be considered as foreign, in the Italick 
letter.</p>

<p><span class="par">[14]</span> Another question may arise with 
regard to appellatives, or the names of species. It seems of no 
great use to set down the words <em>horse</em>, <em>dog</em>, 
<em>cat</em>, <em>willow</em>, <em>alder</em>, <em>daisy</em>, 
<em>rose</em>, and a thousand others, of which it will be hard to 
give an explanation, not more obscure than the word itself. Yet 
it is to be considered, that, if the names of animals be 
inserted, we must admit those which are more known, as well as 
those with which we are, by accident, less acquainted; and if 
they are all rejected, how will the reader be relieved from 
difficulties produced by allusions to the crocodile, the 
chameleon, the ichneumon, and the hy&aelig;na? If no plants are 
to be mentioned, the most pleasing part of nature will be 
excluded, and many beautiful epithets be unexplained. If only 
those which are less known are to be mentioned, who shall fix the 
limits of the reader&rsquo;s learning? The importance of such 
explications appears from the mistakes which the want of them has 
occasioned: had Shakespeare had a dictionary of this kind, he had 
not made the <em>woodbine</em> entwine the <em>honeysuckle</em>; 
nor would Milton, with such assistance, have disposed so 
improperly of his <em>ellops</em> and his <em>scorpion</em>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[15]</span> Besides, as such words, like 
others, require that their accents should be settled, their 
sounds ascertained, and their etymologies deduced, they cannot be 
properly omitted in the Dictionary. And though the explanations 
of some may be censured as trivial, because they are almost 
universally understood, and those of others as unnecessary, 
because they will seldom occur, yet it seems not proper to omit 
them; since it is rather to be wished that many readers should 
find more than they expect, than that one should miss what he 
might hope to find.</p>

<p><span class="par">[16]</span> When all the words are selected 
and arranged, the first part of the work to be considered is the 
orthography, which was long vague and uncertain; which at last, 
when its fluctuation ceased, was in many cases settled but by 
accident; and in which, according to your Lordship&rsquo;s 
observation, there is still great uncertainty among the best 
criticks: nor is it easy to state a rule by which we may decide 
between custom and reason, or between the equiponderant 
authorities of writers alike eminent for judgment and 
accuracy.</p>

<p><span class="par">[17]</span> The great orthographical contest 
has long subsisted between etymology and pronunciation. It has 
been demanded, on one hand, that men should write as they speak; 
but, as it has been shown that this conformity never was attained 
in any language, and that it is not more easy to persuade men to 
agree exactly in speaking than in writing, it may be asked, with 
equal propriety, why men do not rather speak as they write. In 
France, where this controversy was at its greatest height, 
neither party, however ardent, durst adhere steadily to their own 
rule; the etymologist was often forced to spell with the people; 
and the advocate for the authority of pronunciation found it 
sometimes deviating capriciously from the received use of 
writing, that he was constrained to comply with the rule of his 
adversaries, lest he should lose the end by the means, and be 
left alone by following the crowd.</p>

<p><span class="par">[18]</span> When a question of orthography 
is dubious, that practice has, in my opinion, a claim to 
preference which preserves the greatest number of radical 
letters, or seems most to comply with the general custom of our 
language. But the chief rule which I propose to follow is, to 
make no innovation without a reason sufficient to balance the 
inconvenience of change; and such reasons I do not expect often 
to find. All change is of itself an evil, which ought not to be 
hazarded but for evident advantage; and as inconstancy is in 
every case a mark of weakness, it will add nothing to the 
reputation of our tongue. There are, indeed, some who despise the 
inconveniencies of confusion, who seem to take pleasure in 
departing from custom, and to think alteration desirable for its 
own sake; and the reformation of our orthography, which these 
writers have attempted, should not pass without its due honours, 
but that I suppose they hold singularity its own reward, or may 
dread the fascination of lavish praise.</p>

<p><span class="par">[19]</span> The present usage of spelling, 
where the present usage can be distinguished, will, therefore, in 
this work, be generally followed; yet there will be often 
occasion to observe, that it is in itself inaccurate, and 
tolerated rather than chosen; particularly when, by the change of 
one letter or more, the meaning of a word is obscured, as in 
<em>farrier</em> for <em>ferrier</em>, as it was formerly 
written, from <em>ferrum</em>, or <em>fer</em>; in 
<em>gibberish</em> for <em>gebrish</em>, the jargon of 
<em>Geber</em>, and his chymical followers, understood by none 
but their own tribe. It will be likewise sometimes proper to 
trace back the orthography of different ages, and show by what 
gradations the word departed from its original.</p>

<p><span class="par">[20]</span> Closely connected with 
orthography is pronunciation, the stability of which is of great 
importance to the duration of a language, because the first 
change will naturally begin by corruptions in the living speech. 
The want of certain rules for the pronunciation of former ages, 
has made us wholly ignorant of the metrical art of our ancient 
poets; and since those who study their sentiments regret the loss 
of their numbers, it is surely time to provide that the harmony 
of the moderns may be more permanent.</p>

<p><span class="par">[21]</span> A new pronunciation will make 
almost a new speech; and, therefore, since one great end of this 
undertaking is to fix the English language, care will be taken to 
determine the accentuation of all polysyllables by proper 
authorities, as it is one of those capricious ph&aelig;nomena 
which cannot be easily reduced to rules. Thus there is no 
antecedent reason for difference of accent in the two words 
<em>dolorous</em> and <em>sonorous</em>; yet of the one Milton 
gives the sound in this line,

<blockquote>

He pass&rsquo;d o&rsquo;er many a region <em>dolorous</em>;

</blockquote>

and that of the other in this,

<blockquote>

<em>Sonorous</em> metal blowing martial sounds.

</blockquote>

It may be likewise proper to remark metrical licenses, such as 
contractions, <em>generous</em>, <em>gen&rsquo;rous</em>; 
<em>reverend</em>, <em>rev&rsquo;rend</em>, and coalitions, as 
<em>region</em>, <em>question</em>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[22]</span> But still it is more necessary 
to fix the pronunciation of monosyllables, by placing with them 
words of correspondent sound, that one may guard the other 
against the danger of that variation, which, to some of the most 
common, has already happened; so that the words <em>wound</em> 
and <em>wind</em>, as they are now frequently pronounced, will 
not rhyme to <em>sound</em> and <em>mind</em>. It is to be 
remarked, that many words written alike are differently 
pronounced, as <em>flow</em>, and <em>brow</em>: which may be 
thus registered, <em>flow</em>, <em>woe</em>; <em>brow</em>, 
<em>now</em>; or of which the exemplification may be generally 
given by a distich: thus the words <em>tear</em>, or lacerate and 
<em>tear</em>, the water of the eye, have the same letters, but 
may be distinguished thus, <em>tear</em>, <em>dare</em>; 
<em>tear</em>, <em>peer</em>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[23]</span> Some words have two sounds, 
which may be equally admitted, as being equally defensible by 
authority. Thus <em>great</em> is differently used:

<blockquote>

<p>For Swift and him despised the farce of state,<br>
The sober follies of the wise and <em>great</em>. 
<strong>Pope</strong>.</p>

<p>As if misfortune made the throne her seat,<br>
And none could be unhappy but the <em>great</em>.  <strong>Rowe</strong>.</p>

</blockquote>

The care of such minute particulars may be censured as trifling; 
but these particulars have not been thought unworthy of attention 
in more polished languages.</p>

<p><span class="par">[24]</span> The accuracy of the French, in 
stating the sounds of their letters, is well known; and, among 
the Italians, Crescembeni has not thought it unnecessary to 
inform his countrymen of the words which, in compliance with 
different rhymes, are allowed to be differently spelt, and of 
which the number is now so fixed, that no modern poet is suffered 
to increase it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[25]</span> When the orthography and 
pronunciation are adjusted, the etymology or derivation is next 
to be considered, and the words are to be distinguished according 
to the different classes, whether simple, as <em>day</em>, 
<em>light</em>, or compound, as <em>day-light</em>; whether 
primitive, as, to <em>act</em>, or derivative, as 
<em>action</em>, <em>actionable</em>; <em>active</em>, 
<em>activity</em>. This will much facilitate the attainment of 
our language, which now stands in our dictionaries a confused 
heap of words without dependence, and without relation.</p>

<p><span class="par">[26]</span> When this part of the work is 
performed, it will be necessary to inquire how our primitives are 
to be deduced from foreign languages, which may be often very 
successfully performed by the assistance of our own etymologists. 
This search will give occasion to many curious disquisitions, and 
sometimes, perhaps, to conjectures, which to readers unacquainted 
with this kind of study, cannot but appear improbable and 
capricious. But it may be reasonably imagined, that what is so 
much in the power of men as language, will very often be 
capriciously conducted. Nor are these disquisitions and 
conjectures to be considered altogether as wanton sports of wit, 
or vain shows of learning; our language is well known not to be 
primitive or self-originated, but to have adopted words of every 
generation, and, either for the supply of its necessities, or the 
increase of its copiousness, to have received additions from very 
distant regions; so that in search of the progenitors of our 
speech, we may wander from the tropick to the frozen zone, and 
find some in the valleys of Palestine, and some upon the rocks of 
Norway.</p>

<p><span class="par">[27]</span> Beside the derivation of 
particular words, there is likewise an etymology of phrases. 
Expressions are often taken from other languages; some 
apparently, as to <em>run a risk</em>, <em>courir un risque</em>; 
and some even when we do not seem to borrow their words; thus, to 
<em>bring about</em>, or accomplish, appears an English phrase, 
but in reality our native word <em>about</em> has no such import, 
and is only a French expression, of which we have an example in 
the common phrase <em>venir &agrave; bout d&rsquo;une 
affaire</em>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[28]</span> In exhibiting the descent of our 
language, our etymologists seem to have been too lavish of their 
learning, having traced almost every word through various 
tongues, only to show what was shown sufficiently by the first 
derivation. This practice is of great use in synoptical lexicons, 
where mutilated and doubtful languages are explained by their 
affinity to others more certain and extensive, but is generally 
superfluous in English etymologies. When the word is easily 
deduced from a Saxon original, I shall not often inquire further, 
since we know not the parent of the Saxon dialect; but when it is 
borrowed from the French, I shall show whence the French is 
apparently derived. Where a Saxon root cannot be found, the 
defect may be supplied from kindred languages, which will be 
generally furnished with much liberality by the writers of our 
glossaries; writers who deserve often the highest praise, both of 
judgment and industry, and may expect at least to be mentioned 
with honour by me, whom they have freed from the greatest part of 
a very laborious work, and on whom they have imposed, at worst, 
only the easy task of rejecting superfluities.</p>

<p><span class="par">[29]</span> By tracing in this manner every 
word to its original, and not admitting, but with great caution, 
any of which no original can be found, we shall secure our 
language from being overrun with <em>cant</em>, from being 
crowded with low terms, the spawn of folly or affectation, which 
arise from no just principles of speech, and of which, therefore, 
no legitimate derivation can be shown.</p>

<p><span class="par">[30]</span> When the etymology is thus 
adjusted, the analogy of our language is next to be considered; 
when we have discovered whence our words are derived, we are to 
examine by what rules they are governed, and how they are 
inflected through their various terminations. The terminations of 
the English are few, but those few have hitherto remained 
unregarded by the writers of our dictionaries. Our substantives 
are declined only by the plural termination, our adjectives admit 
no variation but in the degrees of comparison, and our verbs are 
conjugated by auxiliary words, and are only changed in the preter 
tense.</p>

<p><span class="par">[31]</span> To our language may be, with 
great justness, applied the observation of Quintilian, that 
speech was not formed by an analogy sent from heaven. It did not 
descend to us in a state of uniformity and perfection, but was 
produced by necessity, and enlarged by accident, and is, 
therefore, composed of dissimilar parts, thrown together by 
negligence, by affectation, by learning or by ignorance.</p>

<p><span class="par">[32]</span> Our inflections, therefore, are 
by no means constant, but admit of numberless irregularities, 
which in this Dictionary will be diligently noted. Thus 
<em>fox</em> makes in the plural <em>foxes</em>, but <em>ox</em> 
makes <em>oxen</em>. <em>Sheep</em> is the same in both numbers. 
Adjectives are sometimes compared by changing the last syllable, 
as <em>proud, prouder, proudest</em>; and sometimes by particles 
prefixed, as <em>ambitious</em>, <em>more</em> ambitious, 
<em>most</em> ambitious. The forms of our verbs are subject to 
great variety; some end their preter tense in <em>ed</em>, as I 
<em>love</em>, I <em>loved</em>, I have <em>loved</em>; which may 
be called the regular form, and is followed by most of our verbs 
of southern original. But many depart from this rule, without 
agreeing in any other, as I <em>shake</em>, I <em>shook</em>, I 
have <em>shaken</em> or <em>shook</em>, as it is sometimes 
written in poetry; I <em>make</em>, I <em>made</em>, I have 
<em>made</em>; I <em>bring</em>, I <em>brought</em>; I 
<em>wring</em>, I <em>wrung</em>; and many others, which, as they 
cannot be reduced to rules, must be learned from the dictionary 
rather than the grammar.</p>

<p><span class="par">[33]</span> The verbs are likewise to be 
distinguished according to their qualities, as actives from 
neuters; the neglect of which has already introduced some 
barbarities in our conversation, which, if not obviated by just 
animadversions, may in time creep into our writings.</p>

<p><span class="par">[34]</span> Thus, my Lord, will our language 
be laid down, distinct in its minutest subdivisions, and resolved 
into its elemental principles. And who upon this survey can 
forbear to wish, that these fundamental atoms of our speech might 
obtain the firmness and immutability of the primogenial and 
constituent particles of matter, that they might retain their 
substance while they alter their appearance, and be varied and 
compounded, yet not destroyed?</p>

<p><span class="par">[35]</span> But this is a privilege which 
words are scarcely to expect: for, like their author, when they 
are not gaining strength, they are generally losing it. Though 
art may sometimes prolong their duration, it will rarely give 
them perpetuity; and their changes will be almost always 
informing us, that language is the work of man, of a being from 
whom permanence and stability cannot be derived.</p>

<p><span class="par">[36]</span> Words having been hitherto 
considered as separate and unconnected, are now to be likewise 
examined as they are ranged in their various relations to others 
by the rules of syntax or construction, to which I do not know 
that any regard has been yet shown in English dictionaries, and 
in which the grammarians can give little assistance. The syntax 
of this language is too inconstant to be reduced to rules, and 
can be only learned by the distinct consideration of particular 
words as they are used by the best authors. Thus, we say, 
according to the present modes of speech, The soldier died 
<em>of</em> his wounds, and the sailor perished <em>with</em> 
hunger; and every man acquainted with our language would be 
offended with a change of these particles, which yet seem 
originally assigned by chance, there being no reason to be drawn 
from grammar why a man may not, with equal propriety, be said to 
die <em>with</em> a wound or perish <em>of</em> hunger.</p>

<p><span class="par">[37]</span> Our syntax, therefore, is not to 
be taught by general rules, but by special precedents; and in 
examining whether Addison has been with justice accused of a 
solecism in this passage,</p>

<blockquote>

<p>The poor inhabitant&mdash;&mdash;<br>
Starves in the midst of nature&rsquo;s bounty curst,<br>
And in the loaden vineyard <em>dies for thirst</em>&mdash;&mdash;</p>

</blockquote>

<p>it is not in our power to have recourse to any established 
laws of speech; but we must remark how the writers of former ages 
have used the same word, and consider whether he can be acquitted 
of impropriety, upon the testimony of Davies, given in his favour 
by a similar passage:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>She loaths the wat&rsquo;ry glass wherein she gaz&rsquo;d,<br>
And shuns it still, although <em>for thirst she dye</em>.</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[39]</span> When the construction of a word 
is explained, it is necessary to pursue it through its train of 
phraseology, through those forms where it is used in a manner 
peculiar to our language, or in senses not to be comprised in the 
general explanations; as from the verb <em>make</em> arise these 
phrases, to <em>make love</em>, to <em>make an end</em>, to 
<em>make way</em>; as, he <em>made way</em> for his followers, 
the ship <em>made way</em> before the wind; to <em>make a 
bed</em>, to <em>make merry</em>, to <em>make a mock</em>, to 
<em>make presents</em>, to <em>make a doubt</em>, to <em>make out 
an assertion</em>, to <em>make good</em> a breach, to <em>make 
good</em> a cause, to <em>make nothing</em> of an attempt, to 
<em>make lamentation</em>, to <em>make a merit</em>, and many 
others which will occur in reading with that view, and which only 
their frequency hinders from being generally remarked.</p>

<p><span class="par">[39]</span> The great labour is yet to come, 
the labour of interpreting these words and phrases with brevity, 
fulness, and perspicuity; a task of which the extent and 
intricacy is sufficiently shown by the miscarriage of those who 
have generally attempted it. This difficulty is increased by the 
necessity of explaining the words in the same language; for there 
is often only one word for one idea; and though it be easy to 
translate the words <em>bright</em>, <em>sweet</em>, 
<em>salt</em>, <em>bitter</em>, into another language, it is not 
easy to explain them.</p>

<p><span class="par">[40]</span> With regard to the 
interpretation, many other questions have required consideration. 
It was some time doubted whether it be necessary to explain the 
things implied by particular words; as under the term 
<em>baronet</em>, whether, instead of this explanation, <em>a 
title of honour next in degree to that of baron</em>, it would be 
better to mention more particularly the creation, privileges, and 
rank of baronets; and whether, under the word <em>barometer</em>, 
instead of being satisfied with observing that it is <em>an 
instrument to discover the weight of the air</em>, it would be 
fit to spend a few lines upon its invention, construction, and 
principles. It is not to be expected, that with the explanation 
of the one the herald should be satisfied, or the philosopher 
with that of the other; but since it will be required by common 
readers, that the explications should be sufficient for common 
use; and since, without some attention to such demands, the 
Dictionary cannot become generally valuable, I have determined to 
consult the best writers for explanations real as well as verbal; 
and, perhaps, I may at last have reason to say, after one of the 
augmenters of Furetier, that my book is more learned than its 
author.</p>

<p><span class="par">[41]</span> In explaining the general and 
popular language, it seems necessary to sort the several senses 
of each word, and to exhibit first its natural and primitive 
signification; as,</p>

<blockquote>

<p>To <em>arrive</em>, to reach the shore in a voyage: he 
<em>arrived</em> at a safe harbour.</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[42]</span> Then to give its consequential 
meaning, to <em>arrive</em>, to reach any place, whether by land 
or sea; as, he <em>arrived</em> at his country-seat.</p>

<p><span class="par">[43]</span> Then its metaphorical sense, to 
obtain any thing desired; as, he <em>arrived</em> at a 
peerage.</p>

<p><span class="par">[44]</span> Then to mention any observation 
that arises from the comparison of one meaning with another; as, 
it may be remarked of the word <em>arrive</em>, that, in 
consequence of its original and etymological sense, it cannot be 
properly applied but to words signifying something desirable; 
thus we say, a man <em>arrived</em> at happiness; but cannot say, 
without a mixture of irony, he <em>arrived</em> at misery.</p>

<p><span class="par">[45]</span> <em>Ground</em>, the earth, 
generally as opposed to the air or water. He swam till he reached 
<em>ground</em>. The bird fell to the <em>ground</em>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[46]</span> Then follows the accidental or 
consequential signification in which <em>ground</em> implies any 
thing that lies under another; as, he laid colours upon a rough 
<em>ground</em>. The silk had blue flowers on a red ground.</p>

<p><span class="par">[47]</span> Then the remoter or metaphorical 
signification; as, the <em>ground</em> of his opinion was a false 
computation. The <em>ground</em> of his work was his 
father&rsquo;s manuscript.</p>

<p><span class="par">[48]</span> After having gone through the 
natural and figurative senses, it will be proper to subjoin the 
poetical sense of each word, where it differs from that which is 
in common use; as <em>wanton</em>, applied to any thing of which 
the motion is irregular without terrour; as,</p>

<blockquote>

<p>In <em>wanton</em> ringlets curl&rsquo;d her hair.</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[49]</span> To the poetical sense may 
succeed the familiar; as of <em>toast</em>, used to imply the 
person whose health is drunk; as,</p>

<blockquote>

<p>The wise man&rsquo;s passion, and the vain man&rsquo;s 
<em>toast</em>. <strong>Pope</strong>.</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[50]</span> The familiar may be followed by 
the burlesque; as of <em>mellow</em>, applied to good 
fellowship:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>In all thy humours, whether grave or <em>mellow</em>.  
<strong>Addison</strong>.</p>

</blockquote>

<p>Or of <em>bite</em>, used for <em>cheat</em>:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&mdash;&mdash;More a dupe than wit,<br>
Sappho can tell you how this man was <em>bit</em>. 
<strong>Pope</strong>.</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[51]</span> And, lastly, may be produced the 
peculiar sense, in which a word is found in any great author: as 
<em>faculties</em>, in Shakespeare, signifies the powers of 
authority:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&mdash; This Duncan<br>
Has borne his <em>faculties</em> so meek, has been<br>
So clear in his great office, that, &amp;c.</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[52]</span> The signification of adjectives 
may be often ascertained by uniting them to substantives; as, 
<em>simple swain</em>, <em>simple sheep</em>. Sometimes the sense 
of a substantive may be elucidated by the epithets annexed to it 
in good authors; as, the <em>boundless ocean</em>, the <em>open 
lawns</em>: and where such advantage can be gained by a short 
quotation, it is not to be omitted.</p>

<p><span class="par">[53]</span> The difference of signification 
in words generally accounted synonymous, ought to be carefully 
observed; as <em>in pride</em>, <em>haughtiness</em>, 
<em>arrogance</em>: and the strict and critical meaning ought to 
be distinguished from that which is loose and popular; as in the 
word <em>perfection</em>, which, though in its philosophical and 
exact sense it can be of little use among human beings, is often 
so much degraded from its original signification, that the 
academicians have inserted in their work, <em>the perfection of a 
language</em>, and, with a little more licentiousness, might have 
prevailed on themselves to have added <em>the perfection of a 
dictionary</em>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[54]</span> There are many other characters 
of words which it will be of use to mention. Some have both an 
active and passive signification; as <em>fearful</em>, that which 
gives or which feels terrour; a <em>fearful prodigy</em>, a 
<em>fearful hare</em>. Some have a personal, some a real meaning; 
as, in apposition to <em>old</em>, we use the adjective 
<em>young</em> of animated beings, and <em>new</em> of other 
things. Some are restrained to the sense of praise, and others to 
that of disapprobation; so commonly, though not always, we 
<em>exhort</em> to good actions, we <em>instigate</em> to ill; we 
<em>animate</em>, <em>incite</em> and <em>encourage</em> 
indifferently to good or bad. So we usually <em>ascribe</em> 
good, but <em>impute</em> evil; yet neither the use of these 
words, nor, perhaps, of any other in our licentious language, is 
so established as not to be often reversed by the correctest 
writers. I shall, therefore, since the rules of style, like those 
of law, arise from precedents often repeated, collect the 
testimonies on both sides, and endeavour to discover and 
promulgate the decrees of custom, who has so long possessed, 
whether by right or by usurpation, the sovereignty of words.</p>

<p><span class="par">[55]</span> It is necessary likewise, to 
explain many words by their opposition to others; for contraries 
are best seen when they stand together. Thus the verb 
<em>stand</em> has one sense, as opposed <em>to fall</em>, and 
another, as opposed to <em>fly</em>; for want of attending to 
which distinction, obvious as it is, the learned Dr. Bentley has 
squandered his criticism to no purpose, on these lines of 
Paradise Lost:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&mdash;In heaps<br>
Chariot and charioteer lay overturn&rsquo;d,<br>
And fiery foaming steeds. What <em>stood, recoil&rsquo;d</em><br>
O&rsquo;erwearied, through the faint satanic host,<br>
Defensive scarce, or with pale fear surpris&rsquo;d,<br>
<em>Fled</em> ignominious.&mdash;&mdash;</p>

</blockquote>

<p>&ldquo;Here,&rdquo; says the critick, &ldquo;as the sentence 
is now read, we find that what <em>stood</em>, 
<em>fled</em>:&rdquo; and, therefore, he proposes an alteration, 
which he might have spared, if he had consulted a dictionary, and 
found that nothing more was affirmed than, that those 
<em>fled</em> who did <em>not fall</em>.</p>

<p><span class="par">[56]</span> In explaining such meanings as 
seem accidental and adventitious, I shall endeavour to give an 
account of the means by which they were introduced. Thus, to 
<em>eke out</em> any thing, signifies to lengthen it beyond its 
just dimensions, by some low artifice; because the word 
<em>eke</em> was the usual refuge of our old writers, when they 
wanted a syllable. And <em>buxom</em>, which means only 
<em>obedient</em>, is now made, in familiar phrases, to stand for 
<em>wanton</em>; because in an ancient form of marriage, before 
the Reformation, the bride promised complaisance and obedience, 
in these terms: &ldquo;I will be bonair and <em>buxom</em> in bed 
and at board.&rdquo;<p>

<p><span class="par">[57]</span> I know well, my Lord, how 
trifling many of these remarks will appear, separately 
considered, and how easily they may give occasion to the 
contemptuous merriment of sportive idleness, and the gloomy 
censures of arrogant stupidity; but dulness it is easy to 
despise, and laughter it is easy to repay. I shall not be 
solicitous what is thought of my work, by such as know not the 
difficulty or importance of philological studies; nor shall think 
those that have done nothing, qualified to condemn me for doing 
little. It may not, however, be improper to remind them, that no 
terrestrial greatness is more than an aggregate of little things; 
and to inculcate, after the Arabian proverb, that drops added to 
drops constitute the ocean.</p>

<p><span class="par">[58]</span> There remains yet to be 
considered the distribution of words into their proper classes, 
or that part of lexicography which is strictly critical.</p>

<p><span class="par">[59]</span> The popular part of the 
language, which includes all words not appropriated to particular 
sciences, admits of many distinctions and subdivisions; as, into 
words of general use; words employed chiefly in poetry; words 
obsolete; words which are admitted only by particular writers, 
yet not in themselves improper; words used only in burlesque 
writing; and words impure and barbarous.</p>

<p><span class="par">[60]</span> Words of general use will be 
known by having no sign of particularity, and their various 
senses will be supported by authorities of all ages.</p>

<p><span class="par">[61]</span> The words appropriated to poetry 
will be distinguished by some mark prefixed, or will be known by 
having no authorities but those of poets.</p>

<p><span class="par">[62]</span> Of antiquated or obsolete words, 
none will be inserted, but such as are to be found in authors, 
who wrote since the secession of Elizabeth, from which we date 
the golden age of our language; and of these many might be 
omitted, but that the reader may require, with an appearance of 
reason, that no difficulty should be left unresolved in books 
which he finds himself invited to read, as confessed and 
established models of style. These will be likewise pointed out 
by some note of exclusion, but not of disgrace.</p>

<p><span class="par">[63]</span> The words which are found only 
in particular books, still be known by the single name of him 
that has used them; but such will be omitted, unless either their 
propriety, elegance or force, or the reputation of their authors, 
affords some extraordinary reason for their reception.</p>

<p><span class="par">[64]</span> Words used in burlesque and 
familiar compositions, will be likewise mentioned with their 
proper authorities; such as <em>dudgeon</em>, from Butler, and 
<em>leasing</em>, from Prior; and will be diligently 
characterized by marks of distinction.</p>

<p><span class="par">[65]</span> Barbarous, or impure, words and 
expressions, may be branded with some note of infamy, as they are 
carefully to be eradicated wherever they are found; and they 
occur too frequently, even in the best writers: as in Pope,</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&mdash;&mdash;in endless error 
<em>hurl&rsquo;d</em>.<br>
<em>&rsquo;Tis these</em> that early taint the female soul.</p>

</blockquote>

<p>In Addison:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>Attend to what a <em>lesser</em> muse indites.</p>

</blockquote>

<p>And in Dryden:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>A dreadful quiet felt, and <em>worser</em> far<br>
Than arms.&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[66]</span> If this part of the work can be 
well performed, it will be equivalent to the proposal made by 
Boileau to the academicians, that they should review all their 
polite writers and correct such impurities as might be found in 
them, that their authority might not contribute, at any distant 
time, to the depravation of the language.</p>

<p><span class="par">[67]</span> With regard to questions of 
purity or propriety, I was once in doubt whether I should not 
attribute too much to myself, in attempting to decide them, and 
whether my province was to extend beyond the proposition of the 
question, and the display of the suffrages on each side; but I 
have been since determined, by your Lordship&rsquo;s opinion, to 
interpose my own judgment, and shall, therefore, endeavour to 
support what appears to me most consonant to grammar and reason. 
Ausonius thought that modesty forbad him to plead inability for a 
task to which Caesar had judged him equal:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>Cur me posse negem posse quod ille putat?</p>

</blockquote>

<p><span class="par">[68]</span> And I may hope, my Lord, that 
since you, whose authority in our language is so generally 
acknowledged, have commissioned me to declare my own opinion, I 
shall be considered as exercising a kind of vicarious 
jurisdiction, and that the power which might have been denied to 
my own claim, will be readily allowed me as the delegate of your 
Lordship.</p>

<p><span class="par">[69]</span> In citing authorities, on which 
the credit of every part of this work must depend, it will be 
proper to observe some obvious rules; such as of preferring 
writers of the first reputation to those of an inferiour rank; of 
noting the quotations with accuracy; and of selecting, when it 
can be conveniently done, such sentences, as, besides their 
immediate use, may give pleasure or instruction, by conveying 
some elegance of language, or some precept of prudence or 
piety.</p>

<p><span class="par">[70]</span> It has been asked, on some 
occasions, who shall judge the judges? And since, with regard to 
this design, a question may arise by what authority the 
authorities are selected, it is necessary to obviate it, by 
declaring that many of the writers whose testimonies will be 
alleged, were selected by Mr. Pope; of whom I may be justified in 
affirming, that were he still alive, solicitous as he was for the 
success of this work, he would not be displeased that I have 
undertaken it.</p>

<p><span class="par">[71]</span> It will be proper that the 
quotations be ranged according to the ages of their authors; and 
it will afford an agreeable amusement, if to the words and 
phrases which are not of our own growth, the name of the writer 
who first introduced them can be affixed; and if, to words which 
are now antiquated, the authority be subjoined of him who last 
admitted them. Thus, for <em>scathe</em> and <em>buxom</em>, now 
obsolete, Milton may be cited:</p>

<blockquote>

<p>&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;The mountain oak<br>
Stands <em>scath&rsquo;d</em> to heaven.&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;<br>
&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;He with broad sails<br>
Winnow&rsquo;d the <em>buxom</em> air.&mdash;&mdash;&mdash;</p>

</blockquote>

<p>By this method every word will have its history, and the 
reader will be informed of the gradual changes of the language, 
and have before his eyes the rise of some words, and the fall of 
others. But observations so minute and accurate are to be 
desired, rather than expected; and if use be carefully supplied, 
curiosity must sometimes bear its disappointments.</p>

<p><span class="par">[72]</span> This, my Lord, is my idea of an 
English dictionary; a dictionary by which the pronunciation of 
our language may be fixed, and its attainment facilitated; by 
which its purity may be preserved, its use ascertained, and its 
duration lengthened. And though, perhaps, to correct the language 
of nations by books of grammar, and amend their manners by 
discourses of morality, may be tasks equally difficult, yet, as 
it is unavoidable to wish, it is natural likewise to hope, that 
your Lordship&rsquo;s patronage may not be wholly lost; that it 
may contribute to the preservation of ancient, and the 
improvement of modern writers; that it may promote the 
reformation of those translators, who, for want of understanding 
the characteristical difference of tongues, have formed a 
chaotick dialect of heterogeneous phrases; and awaken to the care 
of purer diction some men of genius, whose attention to argument 
makes them negligent of style, or whose rapid imagination, like 
the Peruvian torrents, when it brings down gold, mingles it with 
sand.</p>

<p><span class="par">[73]</span> When I survey the Plan which I 
have laid before you, I cannot, my Lord, but confess, that I am 
frighted at its extent, and, like the soldiers of C&aelig;sar, 
look on Britain as a new world, which it is almost madness to 
invade. But I hope, that though I should not complete the 
conquest, I shall, at least, discover the coast, civilize part of 
the inhabitants, and make it easy for some other adventurer to 
proceed further, to reduce them wholly to subjection, and settle 
them under laws.</p>

<p><span class="par">[74]</span> We are taught by the great Roman 
orator, that every man should propose to himself the highest 
degree of excellence, but that he may stop with honour at the 
second or third: though, therefore, my performance should fall 
below the excellence of other dictionaries, I may obtain, at 
least, the praise of having endeavoured well; nor shall I think 
it any reproach to my diligence, that I have retired without a 
triumph, from a contest with united academies, and long 
successions of learned compilers. I cannot hope, in the warmest 
moments, to preserve so much caution through so long a work, as 
not often to sink into negligence, or to obtain so much knowledge 
of all its parts, as not frequently to fail by ignorance. I 
expect that sometimes the desire of accuracy will urge me to 
superfluities, and sometimes the fear of prolixity betray me to 
omissions; that in the extent of such variety, I shall be often 
bewildered, and, in the mazes of such intricacy, be frequently 
entangled; that in one part refinement will be subtilized beyond 
exactness, and evidence dilated in another beyond perspicuity. 
Yet I do not despair of approbation from those who, knowing the 
uncertainty of conjecture, the scantiness of knowledge, the 
fallibility of memory, and the unsteadiness of attention, can 
compare the causes of errour with the means of avoiding it, and 
the extent of art with the capacity of man: and whatever be the 
event of my endeavours, I shall not easily regret an attempt, 
which has procured me the honour of appearing thus publickly.</p>

<p align="right"><strong>My Lord,</strong></p>

<p align="right">Your Lordship&rsquo;s most obedient,</p>

<p align="right">and most humble servant,</p>

<p align="right"><strong>Sam. Johnson</strong>.</p>

<!-- master.com.content -->

</body>

</html>
