<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="Author" content="Normandi Ellis">
<meta name="publisher" content="Johannes Beilharz">
<meta name="copyright" content="Normandi Ellis">
<meta name="keywords"
content="Egyptian Book of the Dead, Normandi, Ellis, Egyptian, Book, of, the, Dead, translation, excerpts">
<meta name="description"
content="Excerpts from The Egyptian Book of the Dead translated by Normandi Ellis">
<meta name="page-topic" content="Kultur,Literatur">
<meta name="audience" content="All">
<meta name="expires" content="2010">
<meta name="robots" content="INDEX,FOLLOW">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 4.0">
<title>Excerpts from The Egyptian Book of the Dead</title>
</head>

<body bgcolor="#E1DEB5">

<p><img src="nut.gif" width="699" height="715"></p>

<p align="left"><font color="#004080"><i>Nut, the Sky, swallows
the sun each evening and brings it forth into the world again at
dawn.</i></font></p>
<div align="left">

<table border="1" cellpadding="5" cellspacing="0" width="600"
bordercolor="#000000">
    <tr>
        <td><img src="eatitalive.gif" width="687" height="257"></td>
    </tr>
</table>
</div>

<p><font color="#004080" size="5"><b>GIVING BREATH TO OSIRIS</b></font></p>

<p>I am the blue egg of the Great Cackler. I am the egg of the
world. I was asleep inside a mound of dirt, now I rise from a
buried egg. I live, I say, I live. I smell the air. I sniff the
air. I walk with my toes in the dirt. I give my family duck meat
to eat. I guard the fledgling in the nest. What food there is for
man in the sky, blue sky. A swallow darts and circles. I am the
egg. I smell the air.</p>

<p>I am the first-born, the light of the sky. I breathe in the
presence of a powerful god, under the belly of sky, upon the
shoulder of Egypt. My breath is like a child to me. My breath
hangs sweet in my nostrils. I am the blue egg of the Great
Cackler. I grow. I swell. I sniff air. I live there like the wing
of a goose.</p>

<p>What a journey I have made, the things I have seen. I am but
one of you. In my hand I grasp the sailing mast, while my left
hand trails in the water. The trees are heavy with figs and
olives. A coconut drops to the ground. I have separated myself
from myself to sail again on the green Nile waters. I sail to the
temple where the gods have gathered to gaze at their faces in
deep pools. In my boat the souls of the years sail with me. The
hair stands on my head in the wind. I hear the splashing of oars
like the cracking of a thin blue shell. Horus keeps one hand on
the rudder. What a journey I have made, the things I have seen.
We glide to the middle of the lake. Give me a cup of milk and
cake or bread. Give me a jug of water and human flesh. Give me
air to breathe and a strong sailing wind when I rise from the
underworld.</p>

<p>A sycamore rises white from the river, filling itself with
water and air. Fill me with water and air. I am the blue egg of
the Great Cackler and I sniff the air. I grow and live. I breathe
and live. On the banks of the Nile, the sky fills with birds and
the sails of boats swell like lungs.</p>

<p align="right"><font color="#004080" size="5"><b>COMING FORTH
AND PASSING THROUGH</b></font></p>

<p>The plug has been lifted from the unguent jar. A perfume of
hours. The past has been rolled into a scroll I shall not see
again. The eye of the hawk is unblinking. Open. Shut. Perfect.</p>

<p>I rise like the sun above olive trees, like the moon above
date palms. Where there is light, I shall be. Where there is
darkness, there is none of me. I rise like the moon above date
palms. I am counted as one among stars.</p>

<p>Beam of light, sun and moon. Shining beast, man and woman. I
am passing through. Come outside among the people. I am light.
Gaze on me. Moon in darkness, sun in morning. Light is what I
will on earth, along the Nile, among the people.</p>

<p>I have traveled through the tomb, dark and lonely ground. I am
here now. I have come. I see. In the underworld, I embraced my
father. I have burned away his darkness. I am his beloved. I have
killed the snake. I have given him meat. I walk in my sleep
through earth and heaven.</p>

<p>I have set the sky in two parts. I pass through. I wander the
horizons. I have dusted my feet with earth. I have worn the skin
of a black panther and chanted into the ears of children. I eat
with my mouth. I chew with my jaw. I am a living god come forth.
I am with the earth millions of years.</p>

<p align="right"><font color="#004080" size="5"><b>RA RISING</b></font></p>

<p>Three lyres. One sun in the east. The image of grace in my two
eyes. One glad body. A day. The wind which moves the boats, moves
them. The strident sun is walking through a field of stars. The
beautiful one is singing in two halves of the sky. A child
speaks. An old man nods and dreams. The people have come from
their houses to sit in doorways to sniff the air.</p>

<p>O sun. O Ra. Osiris risen. O child climbing along mother's
back, laughing. Two men in a bark boat, rowing, stop to hear your
mother singing. Maat at the double season. Strident sun in
heaven.</p>

<p>Ten thousand thousand sticks of light have been raised against
the demon. He is fallen. His beard has been cut. His two hands
and ten fingers have been severed. His sinews are torn by the
knife.</p>

<p>Be quiet. Ra is in the wind. He speaks when the earth is
silent and he alone existed until he named the names of things.
River, he said, and River lived. Nile. Mountain. Beetle.
Fisherman. From his tongue spring words of water. The river
quakes with the sound of his voice. Air escaping from his nose.
Breathe deep. The wind a sigh from his mother. Such things are
made everyday: Duck, Mandrake, Raisin. Grape, Pomegranate, Melon.
Cypress, Palm, Osiris.</p>

<p><img src="rarising.gif" width="738" height="288"></p>

<p><font color="#004080" size="5"><b>THE AWAKENING OF OSIRIS</b></font></p>

<p>Air and earth are my horizons. What lies between is what I am.
O infinite form of being: beast and stone and vegetable; the way
a man may stand in his garden or dance by the river while wakes
of small boats rock the reeds. The cities and the people in them,
gods who walk in white linen, like women under the blue stone of
heaven. I am the priest in a hidden house, guide to inner worlds.
I am the idea of myself in my mother's belly, a bright trembling
star in the memory of morning, a grain of sand blown east. I am
the husband of Isis: woman, and widow, and witch. To embrace her
is to dream of ripening wheat. To sleep in her arms is to dream
of honey. With a word she drives the snakes from the river. The
boats sail far to its mouth.</p>

<p>Air is what I breathe. Earth is where I stand. I have given my
face to Amenta. It is white with heat. The world is bright as
bronze. The dead rise up to see me, breathe the air and look into
my face, a yellow disk on the eastern horizon.</p>

<p align="right"><font color="#004080" size="5"><b>THE HEART OF
CARNELIAN</b></font></p>

<p>Mine is a heart of carnelian, crimson as murder on a holy day.
Mine is a heart of cornel, the gnarled roots of a dogwood and the
bursting of flowers. I am the broken wax seal on my lover's
letters. I am the phoenix, the fiery sun, consuming and resuming
myself. I pace the halls of the underworld. I knock on the doors
of death. I wander into the fields to stare at the sun and lie in
the grass, ripe as a fig. The souls of the gods are with me. They
hum like flies in my ears. I am .1. I will what I will. Mine is a
heart of carnelian, blood red as the crest of a phoenix.</p>

<p><img src="carnelian.gif" width="712" height="237"></p>

<p><font color="#004080" size="5"><b>RETURNING TO SEE HIS HOME</b></font></p>

<p>The night sun rests in the lap of a bear, dreaming in the
northern sky. A half-moon, I shine above the legs. I come forth
from the edge of heaven. I climb to the deepest pit of the sky
and rest awhile above cooling rocks, above houses in the cities
and people who sleep warm nights on the roofs under a half-moon,
dreaming. Oh, I am weak and feeble at the sight of my children
sleeping. Oh, I am weak with wonder to see my dark wife dreaming,
her hair unbraided and perfumed, falling across her eyes and in
her red, red mouth and around her firm, brown shoulders. I am
weak and feeble, gliding in cloudless dark. Forgetful of the
teeth and tongues of snakes, I rest above my homeland dreaming.</p>

<p>Below are my house and cattle. I grow a little stronger. My
beams of light are arrows which wound the night and drive it
back. I am the eye of a sleeping lion who dreams of stalking the
fields with his mate. I am the eye of a resurrected man come home
to kiss his wife. I am a half-moon, high in the darkness, a cup
of light spilling dreams from the sky. I must move on to the
furthest edge of heaven. The wheat in my fields has sprung up in
straight rows. I am a half-moon in the night, keeping watch. I
must move on.</p>

<p><img src="returning.gif" width="768" height="258"></p>

<p align="right"><font color="#004080" size="5"><b>A
PREPONDERANCE OF STARRY BEINGS</b></font></p>

<p>O starry ones! I am a man by a river, gazing up. And how these
same stars quiver above Kheraba and An. How these lights reach
farther than the watch fires of Heliopolis. And what of hidden
things?</p>

<p>O hawk! O restless son, traveling into this season. The snake
writhes in your talons. Your wings brush the edge of the sky.
Long flight of days, passing many lands, death sleeps among your
many feathers.</p>

<p>O soul, ancient ram! come here by the pool to drink. Two horns
of sense and reason implanted in your forehead. Son of the
mountain sky. Dusty hoof which tramps an old trail.</p>

<p>O king! This rock on which we live endures. Yours is the
plumed white crown, tower of flesh infused with spirit. Above,
the eye of god is dreaming us. Below, we are. Air and earth and
mist and fire. To the east the mountains are singing.</p>

<p><img src="preponderance.gif" width="734" height="122"></p>

<p>O lord of acacia trees! whose blooms are the first sensations,
who binds the rags of mummies. This sad mortality! The boat is
set upon its sledge and filled with yellow flowers. O jackal
Anubis! I have passed through the underworld door. Nothing grows
and nothing dies; all that was and would be, is. This life is a
singular breath and your moving eye is time.</p>

<p>Upon the brow of men the word is writ, and in their hearts the
word is deed. Smoke from temple fires curls like hair. The ankh
in your one hand, the knife in your other. O he whose face is too
ponderous for sculpture into stone! Hapi, the waters flow.
Papyrus and lotus spring up. In your boat, sailing from some
unknown city, your body glistens like water.</p>

<p>The gods have heard my name. Osiris. I am a man by the river,
gazing up. Husband and tiller and reaper and king. I am the lord
of seasons, of that which falls and returns to light. I am he who
sowed the seed. I am the bread I have made.</p>

<p>This is such nourishing peace.</p>

<p><font color="#004080" size="5"><b>ADORATION OF RA</b></font></p>

<p>Rejoicing in the houses. The sound of brass bells on dancing
ankles. The hips of women are swaying through dusty streets. Day
upon day the sun is risen. Day upon day the sun will rise. Day
upon day this heat on adobe walls and the splay of light on
Osiris. Morning stars and eventide. Chants ring through the
valley and across the sands, to rise to the altar of heaven. The
soul of Osiris walks with wind into the temples of gods. He sets
sail in the boat of the morning sun. He comes to port at
eventide. He twists and twines through star-studded waters, the
sound of his oars the ssh-sssh of wind. The sun beats on and on
like a tireless heart.</p>

<p>Blessings on thee, hawk, fierce and beautiful as love, whose
horizons are the edges of memory so vast a man gets lost.
Blessings on thee, beetle sun, which rolls into life every day,
kicking six legs and humming your shiny beetle song. This world
is a little patch of ground you travel with no particular haste.
The sun has burst upon the land, light yellow dust on the head of
a bee. The gods are all in rejoicing. They are drunk with sun and
singing, and they crown each other king. The lady of the house
places garlands on Osiris. Vines and flowers from northern and
southern cities meet themselves upon his forehead. &quot;My
lord,&quot; she says, &quot;the sun is so bright today. It hovers
between your shoulders.&quot; The idea of himself travels with
him, affixed like the figurehead on a ship. His enemies beat
themselves with sticks and fall in the water. From the
netherworld the dead are rising to catch a glimpse of his shining
face. The sea is pregnant with form. And the belly of sky is
beautiful.</p>

<p>Every day, the sun. Every day. And I walk east in the garden
to see you, west through the country to be with you. O sun, my
head fills with light. Do not turn me away from your easy lust,
whole in the sky, white with heat. Do not bind me in layers of
darkness, a worm in the brown cake of earth. My hands are bread I
have made every day. The sun comes into my heart where sparrows
nest. I am ridiculous and rolling on the ground, pleased with
such company. Every day, the sun on the wall, the sun, lingering
on a ripe fig. I am he who worships the sun, a space in my heart
a bird could fill. I am one who listens to the grass speaking in
the garden. May I chew the green blade of eternity in a garden
filled with sun. May I walk into the fire and be burned like
kernels of wheat, ground into the pulp of existence. May the sun
come and bake me brown as bread. May I rise like bread everyday.</p>

<p>In the field with my cattle, my shadow sinks into black earth
and rises. The smell of things growing. The horizon parts like
waking lovers and like a child, the sun rises from their sleep.
The world watches its steps, old man, old child, old king. Sun
passing in the sky, light of all that can be said, shadow of
hidden things. Every face watches, every eye turns; resplendent
dawn and evening. Such passion is existence. Every day the sun
king rides his boat, glory dripping like water from an oar. Every
day the streets fill with people, every face, turning. Such power
can not be measured. Such love can not be told. Unspeakable grace
in the fields and cities. I dip my bread in milk and eat.</p>

<p>Mantis, this landscape is hidden from all but the most holy
eye. O sun, going out to the sea's edge over the crest of
mountain, what might man call home but the light in his head, the
scroll in his heart? What darklings wait with blood red teeth
within the walls of his sacred home? Such country the sun has
seen, truth like memory or love. Such colors of robes some young
women wear, more mauve than grapes their gowns and eyes. What is
hidden belongs to the sun. It is too much for a man to know. It
is</p>

<p>Ra who gathers the world together, who holds and beholds with
his eye, this juxtaposition of vegetation and air, the thousand
colors of prayer and stone. Having sprung from formless water, he
takes his shape in fire. He springs from the mouth of the horizon
as if he were the first word he uttered. May he string his words
into song. May be roll through the heavens like music. And for as
long as the sun is singing, may the strings of my soul hum like a
lyre.</p>

<p>Sun, your number is one, multiplied by millions. I am but a
man with my thousand longings for unity. May we never cease to
be. May there be no time in which a man must count the days
toward some end. o, that life could be more than its fragments.
No before and no after, no exaltation but in the timeless one.
The sun is striding over heaven, crossing distances of millions
of years, and the hundreds of thousands of millions... one day of
the sun. He set-rises, set-rises, set-rises over thousands of
cities, trees and mountains and men. The distance of the instant.
He has made an end to hours, and likewise, counted them. In the
morning, earth fills with light. Law and baptism. The one of us
all, endures. It is our work under the sun.</p>

<p>Speak of the rising heart of carnelian. Red heart of a living
god, old priest in an ancient tomb, an image scratched into
muscle and blood. On this stony plateau we stand, all our days
like beads of lapis strung on the throat of sky. We stand.
Existent cities washed with color. Ash of night fallen
underground. The great world pours out its unguents and the
little world is made great. A shout among many people rises on a
day of splendor when the sun folds back on itself. He deepens and
lengthens and thickens, molding his body with light. The sun is
grinding itself like corn. Tendrils of fire seek their limits of
light. This is the color of time, the joy and pain of a birthing
mother. He is born in the form of Ra. He creates himself on his
mother's thigh.</p>

<p>May I reach an everlasting heaven and walk in the legend of
mountain with thoughts as quiet as deer. May I meet myself in
every vegetable and rock quickened by tendrils of light. Holy and
perfect is the world which lives by fire in the embrace of the
carnelian heart. May 1 walk with the sun until eventide,
forgetting the reason of hours. May I burst into light like a
purple flower remembered by a lover.</p>

<p>The sun has risen like gold or wheat, aurora in the land of
his birth, splendor in a country of sky. His mother is wrapped in
the gauze of air, the disc revolves in her hand like a bowl of
meal. Egypt will be fed. Great light bursts on the horizon and
men who've slept in the dark with stomachs empty as night, rush
into the streets hungry, happy to eat morning. Ten thousand
thousand fingers are washed in the Nile flood, ten thousand
thousand grapes and olives are fed by living water. In the towns
and in the temples there is a festival of wine and flowers, one
song many lutes are playing. A woman suckles her baby, while her
husband, drunk with meat and beer, lies in the shade of a fig
tree, singing praises to her inner thigh.</p>

<p>Might of might. Splendor of splendor. This is the terror
inherent in love: that such power may exist without reason, that
death may be feared and lusted for as a woman, that passion gives
rise to passion. I am moved by desire as if in a boat transported
from horizon to horizon. What I have done for love, let it be
held against me. I am a man whose heart is too full. I am a man
empty of sin. It is life I desire and my lust for it and I shall
enter the heart of the mountain together. Together we shall be
judged by shining beasts and they shall say &quot;There walks he
who loved life.&quot; One day, with a shout, I'll rise through
the sky. My voice will mingle with air. I'll cross horizons; with
silver wings I'll enter the realm of magic. Within the temple of
mountain and sky, corn grows amid earth's yellow scars. This is
the sacred cathedral of Ra into which men long to enter. My name
will recall the countless stars under which new lovers kiss.
Death ferries me to a distant shore while striped fish spawn on
turquoise waters, while black fish leap in white rivers.</p>

<p>The universe is drawn in circles. The memory of chariot wheels
clacking across small stones foreshadows the asp's death as he
wraps himself around the wheel. He is crushed by its embrace. The
air crackles when Ra is within. And sailors who've known only
cities by the sea and the whip of the rope and sail, come to moor
at last amid a crush of flowers, and rejoice and weep and go on.
The days before and the days after fill with the odor of
pomegranates; the heart ripens like fruit and falls and breaks.
Sweet meat for the lips of gods. On such a day one glances into
the sky and finds the eye of Ra looks back. One finds loaves of
bread on fine reed mats and the eye of Ra looks back. The air
crackles. The sun beats on and on and on.</p>

<p align="right"><font color="#808000"><b><i>From The Egyptian
Book of the Dead<br>
translated by Normandi Ellis</i></b></font></p>

<p align="left"><i><img src="bull.gif" width="661" height="510"></i></p>
<div align="left">

<table border="0" cellpadding="10" cellspacing="10" width="650"
bgcolor="#C0C0C0">
    <tr>
        <td><img src="book_of_the_dead.jpg" width="303"
        height="475"></td>
        <td valign="top"><font face="Trebuchet MS">These are
        excerpts from Normandi Ellis' translation of the <strong>Egyptian
        Book of the Dead</strong>, published by Phanes Press in
        1991 (ISBN 0933999747). </font><p><font
        face="Trebuchet MS">Available from bookstores or online
        bookstores, e.g. </font><a
        href="http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/search-handle-form/107-4985544-2420558"><font
        face="Trebuchet MS">amazon</font></a><font
        face="Trebuchet MS">.</font></p>
          <p><font face="Trebuchet MS">Published here by kind permission of
          Normandi Ellis.</font></p>
        </td>
    </tr>
</table>
</div>

<p>&nbsp;</p>
</body>
</html>
