<html><head><!-- This document was created from RTF source by rtftohtml version
2.7.5 --><title>Copyright (c) Cynthia Schmidt-Cruz.  All rights reserved.  No
part of this work may be reproduced; any quotations must acknowledge the
source. </title></head><body>

<h2><center>The Maternal Figure as Object of Desire<br>
in the Short Stories of Julio Cort&aacute;zar<br>
or<br>
Writing/ Fantasizing/ Desiring the Maternal Body<br>
in the Short Stories of Julio Cort&aacute;zar</center></h2>

<h3><center>Cynthia Schmidt-Cruz<br>
University of Delaware</center></h3>
<p>
Copyright (c) Cynthia Schmidt-Cruz.  All rights
reserved.  No part of this work may be reproduced; any quotations must
acknowledge the source. <p>
I would be pleased to receive E-mail correspondence regarding this paper or
related topics.  My E-mail address is: schmidt@athens.fllt.udel.edu<p>
<b></b><p>

<b>I.  Introduction</b><p>
<b></b>	I suspect that one of the reasons why Cortazar's stories hold such a
strong grip over many readers is because they often portray seemingly unnatural
or "perverse" instinctual urges which threaten to unravel the very fabric of
our civilized society, but which are ultimately kept in check by their status
as literary fantasies which call attention to their fictional nature.  The
incestuous desire to seduce or be seduced by the mother, which may be
considered the anti-civilized urge <i>par excellence,</i> and the
self-conscious fantasizing of the narrator are two themes which intersect in
the stories "Deshoras" (<i>Deshoras</i>) and "Historias que me cuento"
(<i>Queremos tanto a Glenda</i>).  In each of these stories, through his
fantasies, the narrator reveals his primordial desire to regress to the
maternal womb.<p>
<p>
	The Freudian theory of human civilization rests on the incest taboo or
successful resolution of the Oedipus complex, the function of which is to deny
the child his (or her) primordial love object--the mother.  Thus Freud
maintains that civilization itself depends on the male subject's detachment
from and transcendence of the mother.  Yet, as Madelon Sprengnether argues in
her work, <i>The Spectral Mother.  Freud, Feminism and Psychoanalysis</i>,
Freud was never able to integrate the preoedipal mother, meaning the figure of
the mother in the earliest phase of the child's development,<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn0">[1]</a> with the Oedipal construct.<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn1">[2]</a>  "If anything," she insists, "the dyadic
mother-child relation threatens to subvert the triangular Oedipal structure.
The concepts of repetition compulsion and the death instinct appear to give lie
to the progressive model of development based on the paternal threat of
castration and the male child's renunciation of desire for his mother."<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn2">[3]</a>  Sprengnether argues that in <i>Beyond the
Pleasure Principal </i>and <i>Inhibitions, Symptoms and Anxiety,</i> which
focus on questions of origins (infant separation from the mother) and
conclusions (death), Freud undermines his own progressive model of human
civilization, and at the same time, of Oedipal masculinity, by exposing the
undertow of regressive urges focused on the desire to return to the maternal
body.<a href="schmidt_fn.html#fn3">[4]</a>  <p>
<p>
	Emblematic of this contradictive stance is Freud's characterization in
<i>Beyond the Pleasure Principal</i> of a game invented by his one and one-half
year old grandson   The child tied a wooden reel to a piece of string and
draped it over the side of his bed.  He would repeat <i>Fort!</i> (go away) at
its disappearance and greeted its reappearance with a joyful <i>Da!</i>
(there).  Sprengnether points out that while Freud initially presents the game
as the efforts of a small child to gain mastery over the condition of
separation from his mother, the game enacts not only the child's desire for
control over her departure, but also his wish for her return.<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn4">[5]</a> "The <i>fort/da</i> game, based on a little
boy's memorialization of his loss of his mother, institutionalizes both the act
of renunciation and the impulse toward repression that inheres in it."<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn5">[6]</a> Throughout his work, Sprengnether maintains,
Freud is never able to come to terms with this seductive preoedipal mother
because she is too threatening to his theory of patriarchal authority.<p>
<p>
	The message of "Deshoras" and "Historias que me cuento" seems to affirm the
powerful undertow of the urge to regress to the mother.  The fact that in these
stories the narrators' desire is deflected from the actual mother onto a
mother-figure or surrogate mother reflects the power of the taboo while at the
same time attesting to the strength of the attachment to the maternal object.
Through their fantasies, the narrators articulate their longing for an
unattainable reunion with the maternal body.  The narrators' fantasy has the
power of evoking the absent mother and bringing her under their control, much
as the child's<i> </i> game described by Freud.  Both pursuits strive to master
the separation anxiety at the same time that they memorialize the loss of the
mother.  <p>
<p>
<b>II. "Deshoras"</b><p>
	In "Deshoras"  a man's evocation of his childhood is motivated by his desire
to reunite with a beloved mother figure from the past.  The childhood events
are framed by  the present time of the adult as he puts his memories down in
writing and reflects upon his purpose for transcribing these recollections.
When the narrative switches from the present of the adult to the evocation of
past events, the narrative person changes from first to third, and the narrator
refers to himself as "An&iacute;bal."<a href="schmidt_fn.html#fn6">[7]</a>
Although the narrator begins by denying any motivation behind his memories: "Yo
no ten&iacute;a ninguna raz&oacute;n especial para acordarme de todo eso"
(470),<a href="schmidt_fn.html#fn7">[8]</a> he soon admits that it is the image
of Sara, his playmate Doro's older sister, that draws him to the task.  Because
Doro's mother was an invalid, Sara was obligated to take care of Doro, to
become "una joven madre de su hermano." (471).  The narrator describes the
games An&iacute;bal played with Doro, and vividly recalls his obsessive but
unrequited love for Sara.  As the story continues, he recounts his family's
move to Buenos Aires which occurred shortly before Sara's marriage, two events
that marked his separation from her.  Many years later, as an adult,
An&iacute;bal sees Sara on the street.  The two have a drink, recall old times,
and end up in a bedroom where they consume their mutual passion.  At this
moment, the story returns to the scene of writing, and we realize that the
encounter with Sara did not really occur, but was fantasized by the narrator
through his writing.  <p>
	As the narrator's tale transports him to his world of memories, he establishes
Sara as his surrogate mother by stressing the bond between himself and
Doro--"Tan inseparables hab&iacute;amos sido...Verlo [a Doro] era verme
simult&aacute;neamente como An&iacute;bal" (470).   However, a major and
painful difference between the boys as far as An&iacute;bal is concerned is his
access to Sara's attentions and affection.   An&iacute;bal learns that Sara
takes care of Doro as a devoted mother would, caressing, bathing and curing him
when he is sick.   An&iacute;bal feels excluded from the bubble of nurturance
between Sara and Doro, which he seems to idealize as a lost paradise.<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn8">[9]</a>    At night he fantasizes that Sara comes
into his room to care for a cut on his leg:<p>
<p>
A la hora en que cerrando los ojos imaginaba a Sara entrando de noche en su
cuarto, acerc&aacute;ndose a su cama, era como un deseo de que ella le
preguntara c&oacute;mo estaba, le pusiera la mano en la frente y despu&eacute;s
bajara las s&aacute;banas para verle la lastimadura en la pantorrilla, le
cambiara la venda trat&aacute;ndolo de tonto por haberse cortado con un vidrio.
La sent&iacute;a levant&aacute;ndole el camis&oacute;n y mir&aacute;ndole
desnudo, toc&aacute;ndole el vientre para ver si estaba inflamado,
tap&aacute;ndolo de nuevo para que se durmiera.  (473)<p>
<p>
In this fantasy, An&iacute;bal's reception of Sara's attention is predicated on
illness, a state of dependency.  In his description of Sara's ministrations,
the distinction between care of his injury and seduction becomes blurred--his
need for medical attention veils his desire to be seduced by Sara.<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn9">[10]</a>  As the passive recipient of Sara's care
and gentle reproach, An&iacute;bal is feminized and infantilized.  Sara, as his
fantasized mother/ nurse, becomes as powerful figure--she possesses the power
to heal, the power to shame, the power to seduce.  In this way, questions
concerning seduction--perhaps too dangerous and disturbing to be accrued to his
real mother--can be projected onto the figure of Sara as substitute maternal
object.<a href="schmidt_fn.html#fn10">[11]</a><p>
<p>
	In a curious role reversal, Sara herself enforces the incest taboo, and puts
an end to An&iacute;bal's fantasies of her.  When the boys fall into a muddy
ditch, they must clean up in Doro's house, and Sara walks in while they are
bathing.  An&iacute;bal is deeply humilliated because she has seen him naked,
and subsequently can no longer evoke her in his nocturnal fantasies.  Implicit
in An&iacute;bal's feeling of humiliation is the fact that Sara has the
authority to walk in and look at him because he still has the penis of a child.
Her gaze forces him to acknowledge that, first of all, that she has beheld his
bodily immaturity, and secondly, that he cannot be her lover because his penis
is too small.  This enactment of the castration complex functions at two
levels.  On one level, An&iacute;bal experiences the anxiety men feel in sexual
intercourse associated with the fear of loss of potency and incapacity to
perform sexually in the company of a desirable woman.  At another level, in the
absence of a father figure, <a href="schmidt_fn.html#fn11">[12]</a> Sara
performs the normative and prohibitive function of the castration
complex--namely, the denial of the child's access to the mother as a sexual
object--which is traditionally carried out by the paternal authority.<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn12">[13]</a>  As a result, An&iacute;bal must confront
the fact that a union between them is impossible, and he must orient his
desires toward other women.  <p>
	The years pass.  An&iacute;bal has his sexual initiation with other women,
takes on adult responsibilities, and looses touch with Doro and Sara.  One day
he suddenly spots Sara walking down the sidewalk and goes to her encounter.
An&iacute;bal confesses to Sara that he loved her and fantasized about her as
his "mam&aacute; joven" (478), and tells her how  mortified he felt when she
saw him naked in the shower.  Sara reveals that she did it on purpose, implying
that she, too, was attracted to him, but had to cure him of his sexual
fantasies of her.  She ends her confession saying, "Y ahora s&iacute; otro
whiskey, ahora que los dos somos grandes." (479).  Her admission that she
repressed her reciprocated love for An&iacute;bal in the past because of their
age difference, and her allusion to their mutual maturity in the present
signals the lifting of the prohibition.   The sexual union occurs as soon as is
logistically possible for the two: <p>
<p>
la casi inmediata, furiosa convulsi&oacute;n de los cuerpos en un interminable
encuentro, en las pausas rotas y rehechas y violadas y cada vez menos
cre&iacute;bles, en cada nueva implosi&oacute;n que los segaba y los
sum&iacute;a y los quemaba hasta el sopor (479)<p>
The consumation of the erotic union with the maternal object, the return to the
womb, is thus described by the narrator as an incredibly overwhelming sensation
of bliss.   Now that the written words have arrived at their desired outcome,
the narrator lays down his pen, and the scene shifts abruptly  to his present
reality.  The narrator admits that, up to a point, the words had represented
"una memoria fiel" (480), but that when they spoke of the recent meeting with
Sara,  "ment&iacute;an ..nada era cierto" (480).  He elaborated this fantasized
encounter with Sara because it was the only way to reunite with her.  <p>
	But the fantasy cannot continue:  "pero c&oacute;mo seguir ya, c&oacute;mo
empezar desde esa noche una vida con Sara cuando ah&iacute; al lado se
o&iacute;a la voz de Felisa que entraba con los chicos y ven&iacute;a a decirme
que la cena estaba pronta... y los chicos quer&iacute;an ver al pato Donald en
la televisi&oacute;n de las diez y veinte." (480)   The voice of
Felisa--presumably his wife--and the evocation of his children rescue him from
engulfment in the alluring maternal womb, and draw him back into quotidian
reality where he is the husband of a woman other than his mother--in other
words, a union sanctioned by society-- and the father of her children.   Just
as Sara enforced the prohibition when he was a child, now it is the role that
he has taken on as paternal authority which "rescues" him from the forbidden
bliss of the maternal womb, brings him back to civilized society, and puts
everything back into its rightful place.   Yet his written words remain to
memorialize his longing for the unattainable union.<p>
 <p>
<b>III. "Historias que me cuento"</b><p>
<b></b>	While the narrator of "Deshoras" appears to master, at least
momentarily, his regressive desire, in "Historias que me cuento," the
fa&ccedil;ade of a man's fantasy life of heroic adventures and manly conquests
is rent asunder to expose the radical instability of his masculine identity.
The narrator is a self-described "Walter Mitty porte&ntilde;o" who indulges in
an extremely active fantasy life.<a href="schmidt_fn.html#fn13">[14]</a>  From
the few details he offers about his real life situation we learn that he often
sleeps alone when his partner, Ni&aacute;gara, works the night shift at the
hospital, and that he considers himself incompetent in his own job.  His
fantasies are characterized by "un intenso dramatismo muy trabajado" (401), and
he is almost always in the central role.  One of his favorite fantasies that of
a trucker:  "Ser camionero siempre me ha parecido un trabajo envidiable porque
lo imagino como una de las m&aacute;s simples formas de la libertad, ir de un
lado a otro en un cami&oacute;n que a la vez es una casa con  su
colch&oacute;n."  (402)<p>
	He relates in detail a fantasy in which he, as Oscar the truck driver, picks
up Dilia who is hitch-hiking by the side of the road in a deserted mountaneous
area.  In his description of the fantasy, he stresses Dilia's helplessness,and
the difficulty of the route:  "vi la fr&aacute;gil silueta de Dilia al pie de
las rocas violentamente arrancadas de la nada por el haz de los faros, las
paredes viol&aacute;ceas que volv&iacute;an a&uacute;n m&aacute;s
peque&ntilde;a y abandonada la imagen de Dilia" (402-403).  While he often
picks up women and makes love to them in his trucker fantasies, they are always
unknown women he has seen in a movie or a picture, so he cannot understand why
Dilia has appeared in this fantasy, and puzzles over the question many times:
"Ver a Dilia fue entonces m&aacute;s que una sorpresa, casi un esc&aacute;ndalo
porque Dilia no ten&iacute;a que hacer en esa ruta...Dilia y Alfonso son amigos
que Ni&aacute;gara y yo vemos de tiempo en tiempo...seguirlos de lejos en su
vida de matrimonio con un beb&eacute; y bastante plata."  (403)  Unlike the
other fantasized women who are often cold or timid, Dilia is a willing and even
seductive sexual partner, and the sensuous story of their fortuitious encounter
lasts all night.  <p>
 	Some time later, the narrator and Ni&aacute;gara are invited to dinner at the
home of Dilia and Alfonso, and, to his astonishment, the narrator learns that
his fantasy had paralleled an episode that actually occurred.  Dilia's car
broke down "en pleno sierra," she was alone and terrified at night, and a
trucker finally came by and picked her up.  Alfonso remarks "Se ha quedado
traumatizada.  Ya  me lo contaste, querida, cada vez conozco m&aacute;s
detalles de ese rescate, de tu San Jorge de overol salv&aacute;ndote del
malvado drag&oacute;n de la noche." (407)  To which Dilia replies  "No es
f&aacute;cil olvidarlo...es algo que vuelve y vuelve, no s&eacute; por
qu&eacute;." (407)  Dilia does not know why she cannot forget this episode, but
the narrator realizes that "en el otro lado" the daydreamer materialized as
Oscar the trucker to rescue Dilia, and they shared a night of tender love.<p>
	To his amazement and also to his horror, the narrator begins to desire Dilia
"de este lado."  The baby cries, Dilia runs upstairs to get him, and takes him
into the bathroom to change him.  The narrator follows her in "para hacerle
compa&ntilde;&iacute;a.  Y era como si de alg&uacute;n modo ella superia cuando
le dije Dilia, yo conozco esa segunda parte" (407), meaning that he knows what
she hasn't told Alfonso--that she slept with the trucker who rescued her.  Now,
the narrator's desire for Dilia intensifies, and he focuses on her breasts as
if he had a right to them:  "Sent&iacute; mis ojos como dedos ...buscando los
senos...El deseo era un salto agazapado, un absoluto derecho a acercerme a
buscarle los senos bajo la blusa y envolverla en el primer abrazo." (408)
Here, the narrator's sudden urge to lunge at Dilia's breasts equates him to her
suckling baby.  But Dilia is changing the baby's diaper.  The narrator gets a
whiff of "el olor de un beb&eacute; que se ha hecho pis y caca" and hears Dilia
calming the baby to stop him from crying.  In the story's surprising final
image, the baby has replaced the narrator as the object of Dilia's attention:
<p>
<p>
Vi sus manos que buscaban el algod&oacute;n y lo met&iacute;an entre las
piernas levantadas del beb&eacute;, vi sus manos limpiando al beb&eacute; en
vez de venir a m&iacute; como hab&iacute;an venido en la oscuridad de ese
cami&oacute;n que tantas veces me ha servido en las historias que me cuento.
(408)<p>
<p>
	This scene is startling because the narrator realizes that the baby, not
Dilia's husband, is his rival.  But in another sense it is even more
unsettling:  the image of Dilia's hands cleaning the baby's genitals instead of
touching the narrator as they did in "el otro lado" superimpose the baby in
what was the narrator's place.  An infantilized vision of himself as a helpless
baby flashes before the eyes of the narrator, and this mental image undoubtedly
constitutes for him a shocking realization about the meaning of his desire for
Dilia, and of the truth behind his daydreams.  Does he desire Dilia because she
is the mother of an infant son?  Was his desire for Dilia actually a desire to
return to a state of oneness with the mother?  In his fantasies he may be the
virile male rescuing a damsel in distress, but "en este lado" he sees himself
in the passive role of an infant whose condition of radical dependency requires
that his mother calm his wailing and clean his excrements.  This is so
startling and threatening to the narrator that he immediately invokes his
"cami&oacute;n" and his "historias" in an attempt to regain control and protect
his ego from the condition of helplessnes, and then falls silent.   <p>
	The last words of the story,  "en las historias que me cuento"(408),  echo the
opening line:  "Me cuento historias cuando duermo solo" (401).  In this
circular construction,  life appears to be going backwards.  The narrator
remains trapped in his daydreams because if he lets go of his fantasies of
virile feats, he fears re-engulfment by the maternal womb.  The narrator's
desire for Dilia has led him to a strange but familiar place,--the site of the
uncanny--the mother's body.<a href="schmidt_fn.html#fn14">[15]</a>  Mother, the
child's point of origin, is also its goal and destiny, but will only be
realized in death, thus, the mother is a focus of dread as well as longing.<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn15">[16]</a>  <p>
	The narrator's daydreams of conquering outer space collapse to expose the
desire to retreat, and the urge to tell these stories turns out to be an
attempt to defend himself from the strong regressive drive to return to the
preoedipal mother.  Thus the Walter Mitty fantasies may provide an illusion of
self-sufficiency and mastery, but in so doing, they encode the trauma of
infantile helplessness they seek to control.  Finally, the Walter Mitty
syndrome speaks of the instability of a carefully constructed masculine
identity which threatens to unravel when confronted by the the sensation of
helplessness brought on by the lure of the preoedipal mother.   <p>
<b>IV.  Conclusion</b><p>
<b></b>	"While civilization still rests on the incest taboo, it is a precarious
construct, subject to the undertow of regressive urges focused on the desire to
repair the first rupture from the mother's body."<a
href="schmidt_fn.html#fn16">[17]</a> The message of Cort&aacute;zar's stories
attests to the truth of this observation, as his narrators bear witness to the
seductive and threatening nature of the preoedipal mother.  Through their
depiction of the persistence of the primal urge to regress to a state of
oneness with the maternal body, the stories point to the instability of
masculine identity.  In "Deshoras," the fact that this regressive drive is
contained and controlled through the fantasy is a way of acknowledging its
impossibility and allowing for a "safe return" to "civilized," quotidian
reality.  However, in the unsettling conclusion of "Historias que me cuento,"
the image of the virile male is virtually effaced by the siren call of the
preoedipal mother.  Lurking as they do beneath the fa&ccedil;ade of
self-mastery, the incestuous desires of the Cortazarean protagonists expose the
power of the maternal bond as well as the primal fantasies which structure the
imaginary life of the adult.<p>
<p>
Works consulted:<p>
Abdala, Marisa, "Secuencia y temporalidad en 'Deshoras' de Julio
Cort&aacute;zar," <i>Hispanic Journal </i>1986 spring v 7 (2) p. 115-120.<p>
Benjamin, Jessica.  <i>The Bonds of Love.  Psychoanalysis, Feminism, and the
Problem of Domination. </i> New York:  Pantheon, 1988.<p>
Brooks, Peter.  <i>Body Work.  Objects of Desire in Modern Narrative.</i>
Cambridge:  Harvard University Press, 1993.<p>
Cort&aacute;zar, Julio.  <i>Cuentos completos / 2 (1969-1982). </i> 7th
edition.  Madrid:  Alfaguara, 1994.  <p>
Freud, Sigmund.  <i>Beyond the Pleasure Principal.</i><p>
<i></i>__________.  <i>Civilization and Its Discontents.</i><p>
<i></i>Irigarary., Luce.  <i>The Irigaray Reader.   </i>Margaret Whitford, ed.
Cambridge, MA:  Basil Blackwell, 1991.  <p>
Laplanche, J. and J.-B. Pontalis.  <i>The Language of Psychoanalysis.
</i>Donald Nicholson-Smith, tr. New York:  W.W. Norton &amp; Company, Inc.,
1973.<p>
Rank, Otto.  <i>The Incest Theme in Literature and Legend.  Fundamentals of a
Psychology of Literary Creation. </i> Gregory Richter, tr., Peter L. Rudnytsky,
Introductory essay.  Baltimore:  The Johns Hopkins University Press,
1992.<i></i><p>
<i></i>Sprengnether, Madelon.  <i>The Spectral Mother.  Freud, Feminism and
Psychoanalysis. </i> Ithaca:  Cornell University Press, 1990.<p>
<i></i><p>
<i></i>

<HR>
<A HREF=http://lanic.utexas.edu/project/lasa95/>Back</A> to LASA95 Pilot 
Project page.

<script src="http://www.google-analytics.com/urchin.js" 
type="text/javascript">

</script>
<script type="text/javascript">
_uacct = "UA-420825-1";
urchinTracker();
</script>

</body>

</html>
