<i> Copyright (c) 1961, William S. Burroughs. All Rights Reserved. </i> <p>

"Salt Chunk Mary" had all the "nos" and none of them ever meant "yes". She
named a price heavy and cold as a cop's blackjack on a winter night and
that was it. She didn't name another. Mary didn't like talk and she didn't
like talkers. She received and did business in the kitchen. And she kept it
in a sugar bowl. Nobody thought about that. Her cold grey eyes would have
seen the thought and maybe something goes wrong on the next lay John
Citizen come up with a load of 00 into your soft and tenders or Johnny Law
just happens by. She sat there and heard. When you spread the gear out on
her kitchen table she already knows where you sloped it. She looks at the
gear and a price falls out heavy and cold and her mouth closes and stays
shut. If she doesn't want to do business she just wraps the gear up and
shoves it back across the table and that is that. Mary keeps a blue coffee
pot and a pot of salt pork and beans always on the wood stove. When you
fall in she gets up without a word and puts a mug of coffee and plate of
salt chunk in front of you. You eat and then you talk business. Or maybe
you take a room for a week to cool off. room 18 on the top floor I was
sitting in the top room rose wall paper smoky sunset across the river. I
was new in the game and like all young thieves thought I had a license to
steal. It didn't last. Sitting there waiting on the Japanese girl works in
the Chink laundry a soft knock and I open the door naked with a hard-on it
was the top floor all the way up you understand nobody on that landing.
"Ooooh" she says feeling it up to my oysters a drop of lubricant squeezed
out and took the smoky sunset on rose wall paper I'd been sitting there
naked thinking about what we were going to do in the rocking chair rocks
off down the line she could get out of her dry goods faster than a junky
can fix when his blood is right so we rocked away into the sunset across
the river just before blast off that old knock on the door and I shoot this
fear load like I never feel it wind up is her young brother at the door in
his cop suit been watching through the key hole and learn about the birds
and the bees some bee I was in those days good looking kid had all my teeth
and she knew all the sex currents goose for pimple always made her entrance
when your nuts are tight and aching a red haired smoky sunset one bare knee
rubbing greasy pink wall paper he was naked with a hard-on waiting on the
Mexican girl from Marty's a pearl of lubricant squeezed slowly out and
glittered on the tip of his cock. <p>

(From <i> The Soft Machine </i>, 1961).