<html>

<head>

<title>Macaulay's Review of Croker's Boswell</title>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="texts.css">

</head>

<body>

<h1 align="center">Macaulay's Review of Croker's Boswell</h1>

Thomas Macaulay's review of John Croker's new edition of James
Boswell's <em>Life of Johnson</em> appeared in September 1831, and
was one of the most influential works on <a
href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Johnson/">Samuel Johnson</a> to appear in the nineteenth
century &mdash; in fact, to this day, Johnsonian scholars are fighting
to undo some of the damage Macaulay inflicted.  The text here is
edited by <a href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/">Jack
Lynch</a> from <em>The Works of Lord Macaulay</em>, 12 vols.
(London: Longmans Green and Co., 1898), VIII, 56-111.  I have made the 
following changes:

<ul>

<li>A few obvious misprints (repeated words, &amp;c.) are silently 
corrected;

<li>I have eliminated all footnotes;

<li>I have reduced small caps to regular caps; and

<li>Greek is transliterated in [<em>brackets and italics</em>].

</ul>

The text otherwise reproduces the 1898 text in all accidentals.  
Please send corrections and comments to <a
href="http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/contact.html">Jack
Lynch</a>.

<hr>

<blockquote>

<em>The Life of Samuel Johnson, LL.D.  Including a Journal of a
Tour to the Hebrides, by James Boswell, Esq.  A New Edition, with
numerous Additions and Notes</em>.  By JOHN WILSON CROKER, LL.D.
F.R.S.  Five volumes 8vo.  London: 1831.

</blockquote>

THIS work has greatly disappointed us. Whatever faults we may
have been prepared to find in it, we fully expected that it would
be a valuable addition to English literature; that it would
contain many curious facts, and many judicious remarks; that the
style of the notes would be neat, clear, and precise; and that
the typographical execution would be, as in new editions of
classical works it ought to be, almost faultless. We are sorry to
be obliged to say that the merits of Mr. Croker's performance are
on a par with those of a certain leg of mutton on which Dr.
Johnson dined, while travelling from London to Oxford, and which
he, with characteristic energy, pronounced to be "as bad as bad
could be, ill fed, ill killed, ill kept, and ill dressed." This
edition is ill compiled, ill arranged, ill written, and ill
printed.<p>

Nothing in the work has astonished us so much as the ignorance or
carelessness of Mr. Croker with respect to facts and dates. Many
of his blunders are such as we should be surprised to hear any
well educated gentleman commit, even in conversation. The tomes
absolutely swarm with misstatements into which the editor never
would have fallen, if he had taken the slightest pains to
investigate the truth of his assertions, or if he had even been
well acquainted with the book on which he undertook to comment.
We will give a few instances.<p>

Mr. Croker tells us in a note that Derrick, who was master of the
ceremonies at Bath, died very poor in 1760. We read on; and, a
few pages later, we find Dr. Johnson and Boswell talking of this
same Derrick as still living and reigning, as having retrieved
his character, as possessing so much power over his subjects at
Bath, that his opposition might be fatal to Sheridan's lectures
on oratory. And all this is in 1763. The fact is, that Derrick
died in 1769.<p>

In one note we read, that Sir Herbert Croft, the author of that
pompous and foolish account of Young, which appears among the
Lives of the Poets, died in 1805. Another note in the same volume
states, that this same Sir Herbert Croft died at Paris, after
residing abroad for fifteen years, on the 27th of April 1816.<p>

Mr. Croker informs us, that Sir William Forbes of Pitsligo, the
author of the Life of Beattie, died in 1816. A Sir William Forbes
undoubtedly died in that year, but not the Sir William Forbes in
question, whose death took place in 1806. It is notorious,
indeed, that the biographer of Beattie lived just long enough to
complete the history of his friend. Eight or nine years before
the date which Mr. Croker has assigned for Sir William's death,
Sir Walter Scott lamented that event in the introduction to the
fourth canto of Marmion. Every schoolgirl knows the lines:<p>

<blockquote>

"Scarce had lamented Forbes paid<br>
The tribute to his Minstrel's shade;<br>
The tale of friendship scarce was told,<br>
Ere the narrator's heart was cold:<br>
Far may we search before we find<br>
A heart so manly and so kind!"

</blockquote>

In one place, we are told, that Allan Ramsay, the painter, was
born in 1709, and died in 1784; in another, that he died in 1784,
in the seventy-first year of his age.<p>

In one place, Mr. Croker says, that at the commencement of the
intimacy between Dr. Johnson and Mrs. Thrale, in 1765, the lady
was twenty-five years old. In other places he says, that Mrs.
Thrale's thirty-fifth year coincided with Johnson's seventieth,
Johnson was born in 1709. If, therefore, Mrs. Thrale's
thirty-fifth year coincided with Johnson's seventieth, she could
have been only twenty-one years old in 1765. This is not all. Mr.
Croker, in another place, assigns the year 1777 as the date of
the complimentary lines which Johnson made on Mrs. Thrale's
thirty-fifth birthday. If this date be correct, Mrs. Thrale must
have been born in 1742, and could have been only twenty-three
when her acquaintance with Johnson commenced. Mr. Croker
therefore gives us three different statements as to her age. Two
of the three must be incorrect. We will not decide between them:
we will only say, that the reasons which Mr. Croker gives for
thinking that Mrs. Thrale was exactly thirty-five years old when
Johnson was seventy, appear to us utterly frivolous.<p>

Again, Mr. Croker informs his readers that "Lord Mansfield
survived Johnson full ten years." Lord Mansfield survived Dr.
Johnson just eight years and a quarter.<p>

Johnson found in the library of a French lady, whom he visited
during his short visit to Paris, some works which he regarded
with great disdain. "I looked," says he, "into the books in the
lady's closet, and, in contempt, showed them to Mr. Thrale.
Prince Titi, Biblioth&egrave;que des F&eacute;es, and other
books."  "The History of Prince Titi," observes Mr. Croker, "was
said to be the autobiography of Frederick Prince of Wales, but
was probably written by Ralph, his secretary." A more absurd note
never was penned. The history of Prince Titi, to which Mr. Croker
refers, whether written by Prince Frederick or by Ralph, was
certainly never published. If Mr. Croker had taken the trouble to
read with attention that very passage in Park's Royal and Noble
Authors which he cites as his authority, he would have seen that
the manuscript was given up to the government. Even if this
memoir had been printed it is not very likely to find its way
into a French lady's bookcase. And would any man in his senses
speak contemptuously of a French lady, for having in her
possession an English work, so curious and interesting as a Life
of Prince Frederick, whether written by himself or by a
confidential secretary, must have been? The history at which
Johnson laughed was a very proper companion to the
Biblioth&egrave;que des F&eacute;es, a fairy tale about good
Prince Titi and naughty Prince Violent. Mr. Croker may find it in
the Magasin des Enfans, the first French book which the little
girls of England read to their governesses.<p>

Mr. Croker states that Mr. Henry Bate, who afterwards assumed the
name of Dudley, was proprietor of the Morning Herald, and fought
a duel with George Robinson Stoney, in consequence of some
attacks on Lady Strathmore which appeared in that paper. Now Mr.
Bate was then connected, not with the Morning Herald, but with
the Morning Post; and the dispute took place before the Morning
Herald was in existence. The duel was fought in January 1777. The
Chronicle of the Annual Register for that year contains an
account of the transaction, and distinctly states that Mr. Bate
was editor of the Morning Post. The Morning Herald, as any person
may see by looking at any number of it, was not established till
some years after this affair. For this blunder there is, we must
acknowledge, some excuse: for it certainly seems almost
incredible to a person living in our time that any human being
should ever have stooped to fight with a writer in the Morning
Post.<p>

"James de Duglas," says Mr. Croker, "was requested by King Robert
Bruce in his last hours, to repair, with his heart to Jerusalem,
and humbly to deposit it at the sepulchre of our Lord, which he
did in 1329." Now, it is well known that he did no such thing,
and for a very sufficient reason, because he was killed by the
way. Nor was it in 1329 that he set out. Robert Bruce died in
1329, and the expedition of Douglas took place in the following
year, "Quand le printems vint et la saison," says Froissart, in
June, 1330, says Lord Hailes, whom Mr. Croker cites as the
authority for his statement.<p>

Mr. Croker tells us that the great Marquis of Montrose was
beheaded at Edinburgh in 1650. There is not a forward boy at any
school in England who does not know that the marquis was hanged.
The account of the execution is one of the finest passages in
Lord Clarendon's History. We can scarcely suppose that Mr. Croker
has never read that passage; and yet we can scarcely suppose that
any person who has ever perused so noble and pathetic a story can
have utterly forgotten all its most striking circumstances.<p>

"Lord Townshend," says Mr. Croker, "was not secretary of state
till 1720." Can Mr. Croker possibly be ignorant that Lord
Townshend was made secretary of state at the accession of George
I. in 1714, that he continued to be secretary of state till he
was displaced by the intrigues of Sunderland and Stanhope at the
close of 1716, and that he returned to the office of secretary of
state, not in 1720, but in 1721?<p>

Mr. Croker, indeed, is generally unfortunate in his statements
respecting the Townshend family. He tells us that Charles
Townshend, the chancellor of the exchequer, was "nephew of the
prime minister, and son of a peer who was secretary of state, and
leader of the House of Lords." Charles Townshend was not nephew,
but grandnephew, of the Duke of Newcastle, not son, but grandson,
of the Lord Townshend who was secretary of state and leader of
the House of Lords.<p>

"General Burgoyne surrendered at Saratoga," says Mr. Croker, "in
March, 1778." General Burgoyne surrendered on the 17th of
October, 1777.<p>

"Nothing," says Mr. Croker, "can be more unfounded than the
assertion that Byng fell a martyr <em>to political party</em>. By a
strange coincidence of circumstances it happened that there was a
total change of administration between his condemnation and his
death: so that one party presided at his trial, and another at
his execution: there can be no stronger proof that he was
<em>not</em> a political martyr." Now what will our readers think
of this writer, when we assure them that this statement, so
confidently made, respecting events so notorious, is absolutely
untrue? One and the same administration was in office when the
court-martial on Byng commenced its sittings, through the whole
trial, at the condemnation, and at the execution. In the month of
November, 1756, the Duke of Newcastle and Lord Hardwicke
resigned; the Duke of Devonshire became first lord of the
treasury, and Mr. Pitt secretary of state. This administration
lasted till the month of April, 1757. Byng's court-martial began
to sit on the 28th of December, 1756. He was shot on the 14th of
March, 1757. There is something at once diverting and provoking
in the cool and authoritative manner in which Mr. Croker makes
these random assertions. We do not suspect him of intentionally
falsifying history. But of this high literary misdemeanour we do
without hesitation accuse him, that he has no adequate sense of
the obligation which a writer, who professes to relate facts,
owes to the public. We accuse him of a negligence and an
ignorance analogous to that <em>crassa negligentia</em>, and that
<em>crassa ignorantia</em>, on which the law animadverts in
magistrates and surgeons, even when malice and corruption are not
imputed. We accuse him of having undertaken a work which, if not
performed with strict accuracy, must be very much worse than
useless, and of having performed it as if the difference between
an accurate and an inaccurate statement was not worth the trouble
of looking into the most common book of reference.<p>

But we must proceed. These volumes contain mistakes more gross,
if possible, than any that we have yet mentioned. Boswell has
recorded some observations made by Johnson on the changes which
had taken place in Gibbon's religious opinions. That Gibbon when
a lad at Oxford turned Catholic is well known. "It is said,"
cried Johnson, laughing, "that he has been a Mahommedan." "This
sarcasm," says the editor, "probably alludes to the tenderness
with which Gibbon's malevolence to Christianity induced him to
treat Mahommedanism in his history." Now the sarcasm was uttered
in 1776: and that part of the History of the Decline and Fall of
the Roman Empire which relates to Mahommedanism was not published
till 1788, twelve years after the date of this conversation, and
near four years after the death of Johnson.<p>

"It was in the year 1761," says Mr. Croker, "that Goldsmith
published his Vicar of Wakefield. This leads the editor to
observe a more serious inaccuracy of Mrs. Piozzi, than Mr.
Boswell notices, when he says Johnson left her table to go and
sell the Vicar of Wakefield for Goldsmith. Now Dr. Johnson was
not acquainted with the Thrales till 1765, four years after the
book had been published." Mr. Croker in reprehending the fancied
inaccuracy of Mrs. Thrale, has himself shown a degree of
inaccuracy, or to speak more properly, a degree of ignorance,
hardly credible. In the first place, Johnson became acquainted
with the Thrales, not in 1765, but in 1764, and during the last
weeks of 1764 dined with them every Thursday, as is written in
Mrs. Piozzi's anecdotes. In the second place, Goldsmith published
the Vicar of Wakefield, not in 1761, but in 1766. Mrs. Thrale
does not pretend to remember the precise date of the summons
which called Johnson from her table to the help of his friend.
She says only that it was near the beginning of her acquaintance
with Johnson, and certainly not later than 1766. Her accuracy is
therefore completely vindicated. It was probably after one of her
Thursday dinners in 1764 that the celebrated scene of the
landlady, the sheriff's officer, and the bottle of Madeira took
place.<p>

The very page which contains this monstrous blunder, contains
another blunder, if possible, more monstrous still. Sir Joseph
Mawbey, a foolish member of Parliament, at whose speeches and
whose pig-styes the wits of Brookes's were, fifty years ago, in
the habit of laughing most unmercifully, stated, on the authority
of Garrick, that Johnson, while sitting in a coffeehouse at
Oxford, about the time of his doctor's degree, used some
contemptuous expressions respecting Home's play and Macpherson's
Ossian. "Many men," he said, "many women, and many children,
might have written Douglas." Mr. Croker conceives that he has
detected an inaccuracy, and glories over poor Sir Joseph in a
most characteristic manner. "I have quoted this anecdote solely
with the view of showing to how little credit hearsay anecdotes
are in general entitled. Here is a story published by Sir Joseph
Mawbey, a member of the House of Commons, and a person every way
worthy of credit, who says he had it from Garrick. Now mark:
Johnson's visit to Oxford, about the time of his doctor's degree,
was in 1754, the first time he had been there since he left the
university. But Douglas was not acted till 1756, and Ossian not
published till 1760. All, therefore, that is new in Sir Joseph
Mawbey's story is false."' Assuredly we need not go far to find
ample proof that a member of the House of Commons may commit a
very gross error. Now mark, say we, in the language of Mr.
Croker. The fact is, that Johnson took his Master's degree in
1754, and his Doctor's degree in 1775. In the spring of 1776, he
paid a visit to Oxford, and at this visit a conversation
respecting the works of Home and Macpherson might have taken
place, and, in all probability, did take place. The only real
objection to the story Mr. Croker has missed. Boswell states,
apparently on the best authority, that as early at least as the
year 1763, Johnson, in conversation with Blair, used the same
expressions respecting Ossian, which Sir Joseph represents him as
having used respecting Douglas. Sir Joseph, or Garrick,
confounded, we suspect, the two stories. But their error is
venial, compared with that of Mr. Croker.<p>

We will not multiply instances of this scandalous inaccuracy. It
is clear that a writer who, even when warned by the text on which
he is commenting, falls into such mistakes as these, is entitled
to no confidence whatever. Mr. Croker has committed an error of
five years with respect to the publication of Goldsmith's novel,
an error of twelve years with respect to the publication of part
of Gibbon's History, an error of twenty-one years with respect to
an event in Johnson's life so important as the taking of the
doctoral degree. Two of these three errors he has committed,
while ostentatiously displaying his own accuracy, and correcting
what he represents as the loose assertions of others. How can his
readers take on trust his statements concerning the births,
marriages, divorces, and deaths of a crowd of people, whose names
are scarcely known to this generation? It is not likely that a
person who is ignorant of what almost every body knows can know
that of which almost every body is ignorant. We did not open this
book with any wish to find blemishes in it. We have made no
curious researches. The work itself, and a very common knowledge
of literary and political history, have enabled us to detect the
mistakes which we have pointed out, and many other mistakes of
the same kind. We must say, and we say it with regret, that we do
not consider the authority of Mr. Croker, unsupported by other
evidence, as sufficient to justify any writer who may follow him
in relating a single anecdote or in assigning a date to a single
event.<p>

Mr. Croker shows almost as much ignorance and heedlessness in his
criticisms as in his statements concerning facts. Dr. Johnson
said, very reasonably as it appears to us, that some of the
satires of Juvenal are too gross for imitation. Mr. Croker, who,
by the way, is angry with Johnson for defending Prior's tales
against the charge of indecency, resents this aspersion on
Juvenal, and indeed refuses to believe that the doctor can have
said any thing so absurd. "He probably said &mdash; some
<em>passages</em> of them &mdash; for there are none of Juvenal's
satires to which the same objection may be made as to one of
Horace's, that it is <em>altogether</em> gross and licentious."
Surely Mr. Croker can never have read the second and ninth
satires of Juvenal.<p>

Indeed the decisions of this editor on points of classical
learning, though pronounced in a very authoritative tone, are
generally such that, if a schoolboy under our care were to utter
them, our soul assuredly should not spare for his crying. It is
no disgrace to a gentleman who has been engaged during near
thirty years in political life that he has forgotten his Greek
and Latin. But he becomes justly ridiculous if, when no longer
able to construe a plain sentence, he affects to sit in judgment
on the most delicate questions of style and metre. From one
blunder, a blunder which no good scholar would have made, Mr.
Croker was saved, as he informs us, by Sir Robert Peel, who
quoted a passage exactly in point from Horace. We heartily wish
that Sir Robert, whose classical attainments are well known, had
been more frequently consulted. Unhappily he was not always at
his friend's elbow; and we have therefore a rich abundance of the
strangest errors. Boswell has preserved a poor epigram by
Johnson, inscribed "Ad Lauram parituram." Mr. Croker censures the
poet for applying the word puella to a lady in Laura's situation,
and for talking of the beauty of Lucina. "Lucina," he says, "was
never famed for her beauty." If Sir Robert Peel had seen this
note, he probably would have again refuted Mr. Croker's
criticisms by an appeal to Horace. In the secular ode, Lucina is
used as one of the names of Diana, and the beauty of Diana is
extolled by all the most orthodox doctors of the ancient
mythology, from Homer in his Odyssey, to Claudian in his Rape of
Proserpine. In another ode, Horace describes Diana as the goddess
who assists the "laborantes utero puellas." But we are ashamed to
detain our readers with this fourth-form learning.<p>

Boswell found, in his tour to the Hebrides, an inscription
written by a Scotch minister. It runs thus: "Joannes Macleod,
&amp;c., gentis su&aelig; Philarchus, &amp;c., Flor&aelig;
Macdonald matrimoniali vinculo conjugatus turrem hanc
Beganodunensem pro&aelig;vorum habitaculum longe vetustissimum,
diu penitus labefactatam, anno &aelig;r&aelig; vulgaris MDCLXXXVI.
instauravit" &mdash; "The minister," says Mr. Croker, "seems to have
been no contemptible Latinist. Is not Philarchus a very happy
term to express the paternal and kindly authority of the head of
a clan?" The composition of this eminent Latinist, short as it
is, contains several words that are just as much Coptic as Latin,
to say nothing of the incorrect structure of the sentence. The
word Philarchus, even if it were a happy term expressing a
paternal and kindly authority, would prove nothing for the
minister's Latin, whatever it might prove for his Greek. But it
is clear that the word Philarchus means, not a man who rules by
love, but a man who loves rule. The Attic writers of the best age
use the word [<em>philarchos</em>] in the sense which we assign to
it. Would Mr Croker translate [<em>philosophos</em>], a man who
acquires wisdom by means of love, or [<em>philokerd&ecirc;s</em>],
a man who makes money by means of love? In fact, it requires no
Bentley or Casaubon to perceive that Philarchus is merely a false
spelling for Phylarchus the chief of a tribe.<p>

Mr. Croker has favoured us with some Greek of his own. "At the
altar," says Dr. Johnson, "I recommended my [<em>theta phi</em>]."
"These letters," says the editor, "(which Dr. Strahan seems not
to have understood) probably mean [<em>thn&ecirc;toi philoi</em>],
<em>departed friends</em>." Johnson was not a first-rate Greek
scholar; but he knew more Greek than most boys when they leave
school; and no schoolboy could venture to use the word
[<em>thn&ecirc;toi</em>] in the sense which Mr. Croker ascribes to
it without imminent danger of a flogging.<p>

Mr. Croker has also given us a specimen of his skill in
translating Latin. Johnson wrote a note in which he consulted his
friend, Dr. Lawrence, on the propriety of losing some blood. The
note contains these words: &mdash; "Si per te licet, imperatur nuncio
Holderum ad me deducere." Johnson should rather have written
"imperatum est." But the meaning of the words is perfectly clear.
"If you say yes, the messenger has orders to bring Holder to me."
Mr. Croker translates the words as follows: "If you consent, pray
tell the messenger to bring Holder to me." If Mr. Croker is
resolved to write on points of classical learning, we would
advise him to begin by giving an hour every morning to our old
friend Corderius.<p>

Indeed we cannot open any volume of this work in any place, and
turn it over for two minutes in any direction, without lighting
on a blunder. Johnson, in his Life of Tickell, stated that the
poem entitled The Royal Progress, which appears in the last
volume of the Spectator, was written on the accession of George
the First. The word "arrival" was afterwards substituted for
"accession." "The reader will observe," says Mr. Croker, "that
the Whig term <em>accession</em>, which might imply legality, was
altered into a statement of the simple fact of King George's
<em>arrival</em>." Now Johnson, though a bigoted Tory, was not
quite such a fool as Mr. Croker here represents him to be. In the
Life of Granville, Lord Lansdowne, which stands a very few pages
from the Life of Tickell, mention is made of the accession of
Anne, and of the accession of George the First. The word arrival
was used in the Life of Tickell for the simplest of all reasons.
It was used because the subject of the poem called The Royal
Progress was the arrival of the king, and not his accession,
which took place near two months before his arrival.<p>

The editor's want of perspicacity is indeed very amusing. He is
perpetually telling us that he cannot understand something in the
text which is as plain as language can make it. "Mattaire," said
Dr. Johnson, "wrote Latin verses from time to time, and published
a set in his old age, which he called <em>Senilia</em>, in which he
shows so little learning or taste in writing, as to make Carteret
a dactyl." Hereupon we have this note: "The editor does not
understand this objection, nor the following observation." The
following observation, which Mr. Croker cannot understand, is
simply this: "In matters of genealogy," says Johnson, "it is
necessary to give the bare names as they are. But in poetry and
in prose of any elegance in the writing, they require to have
inflection given to them." If Mr. Croker had told Johnson that
this was unintelligible, the doctor would probably have replied,
as he replied on another occasion, "I have found you a reason,
sir; I am not bound to find you an understanding." Every body who
knows any thing of Latinity knows that, in genealogical tables,
Joannes Baro de Carteret, or Vice-comes de Carteret, may be
tolerated, but that in compositions which pretend to elegance,
Carteretus, or some other form which admits of inflection, ought
to be used.<p>

All our readers have doubtless seen the two distichs of Sir
William Jones, respecting the division of the time of a lawyer.
One of the distichs is translated from some old Latin lines; the
other is original. The former runs thus:

<blockquote>

"Six hours to sleep, to law's grave study six,<br>
Four spend in prayer, the rest on nature fix."

</blockquote>

"Rather," says Sir William Jones,

<blockquote>

"Six hours to law, to soothing slumbers seven,<br>
Ten to the world allot, and all to heaven."

</blockquote>

The second couplet puzzles Mr. Croker strangely, "Sir William,"
says he, "has shortened his day to twenty-three hours, and the
general advice of 'all to heaven,' destroys the peculiar
appropriation of a certain period to religious exercises." Now,
we did not think that it was in human dulness to miss the meaning
of the lines so completely. Sir William distributes twenty-three
hours among various employments. One hour is thus left for
devotion. The reader expects that the verse will end with "and
one to heaven." The whole point of the lines consists in the
unexpected substitution of "all" for "one." The conceit is
wretched enough; but it is perfectly intelligible, and never, we
will venture to say, perplexed man, woman, or child before.<p>

Poor Tom Davies, after failing in business, tried to live by his
pen. Johnson called him "an author generated by the corruption of
a bookseller." This is a very obvious, and even a commonplace
allusion to the famous dogma of the old physiologists. Dryden
made a similar allusion to that dogma before Johnson was born.
Mr. Croker, however, is unable to understand what the doctor
meant. "The expression," he says, "seems not quite clear." And he
proceeds to talk about the generation of insects, about bursting
into gaudier life, and Heaven knows what.<p>

There is a still stranger instance of the editor's talent for
finding out difficulty in what is perfectly plain. "No man," said
Johnson, "can now be made a bishop for his learning and piety."
"From this too just observation," says Boswell, "there are some
eminent exceptions." Mr. Croker is puzzled by Boswell's very
natural and simple language. "That a general observation should
be pronounced <em>too just</em>, by the very person who admits that
it is not universally just, is not a little odd."<p>

A very large proportion of the two thousand five hundred notes
which the editor boasts of having added to those of Boswell and
Malone consists of the flattest and poorest reflections,
reflections such as the least intelligent reader is quite
competent to make for himself, and such as no intelligent reader
would think it worth while to utter aloud. They remind us of
nothing so much as of those profound and interesting annotations
which are pencilled by sempstresses and apothecaries' boys on the
dog-eared margins of novels borrowed from circulating libraries;
"How beautiful!" "Cursed prosy!" "I don't like Sir Reginald
Malcolm at all." "I think Pelham is a sad dandy." Mr. Croker is
perpetually stopping us in our progress through the most
delightful narrative in the language to observe that really Dr.
Johnson was very rude that he talked more for victory than for
truth, that his taste for port wine with capillaire in it was
very odd, that Boswell was impertinent, that it was foolish in
Mrs. Thrale to marry the music-master; and so forth.<p>

We cannot speak more favourably of the manner in which the notes
are written than of the matter of which they consist. We find in
every page words used in wrong senses, and constructions which
violate the plainest rules of grammar. We have the vulgarism of
"mutual friend," for "common friend." We have "fallacy" used as
synonymous with "falsehood." We have many such inextricable
labyrinths of pronouns as that which follows: "Lord Erskine was
fond of this anecdote; he told it to the editor the first time
that he had the honour of being in his company." Lastly, we have
a plentiful supply of sentences resembling those which we
subjoin. "Markland, <em>who</em>, with Jortin and Thirlby, Johnson
calls three contemporaries of great eminence." "Warburton himself
did not feel, as Mr. Boswell was disposed to think he did, kindly
or gratefully <em>of</em> Johnson." "It was <em>him</em> that Horace
Walpole called a man who never made a bad figure but as an
author." One or two of these solecisms should perhaps be
attributed to the printer, who has certainly done his best to
fill both the text and the notes with all sorts of blunders. In
truth, he and the editor have between them made the book so bad,
that we do not well see how it could have been worse.<p>

When we turn from the commentary of Mr. Croker to the work of our
old friend Boswell, we find it not only worse printed than in any
other edition with which we are acquainted, but mangled in the
most wanton manner. Much that Boswell inserted in his narrative
is, without the shadow of a reason, degraded to the appendix. The
editor has also taken upon himself to alter or omit passages
which he considers as indecorous. This prudery is quite
unintelligible to us. There is nothing immoral in Boswell's book,
nothing which tends to inflame the passions. He sometimes uses
plain words. But if this be a taint which requires expurgation,
it would be desirable to begin by expurgating the morning and
evening lessons. The delicate office which Mr. Croker has
undertaken he has performed in the most capricious manner. One
strong, old-fashioned, English word, familiar to all who read
their Bibles, is changed for a softer synonyme in some passages
and suffered to stand unaltered in others. In one place a faint
allusion made by Johnson to an indelicate subject, an allusion so
faint that, till Mr. Croker's note pointed it out to us, we had
never noticed it, and of which we are quite sure that the meaning
would never be discovered by any of those for whose sake books
are expurgated, is altogether omitted. In another place, a coarse
and stupid jest of Dr. Taylor on the same subject, expressed in
the broadest language, almost the only passage, as far as we
remember, in all Boswell's book, which we should have been
inclined to leave out, is suffered to remain.<p>

We complain, however, much more of the additions than of the
omissions. We have half of Mrs. Thrale's book, scraps of Mr.
Tyers, scraps of Mr. Murphy, scraps of Mr. Cradock, long prosings
of Sir John Hawkins, and connecting observations by Mr. Croker
himself, inserted into the midst of Boswell's text To this
practice we most decidedly object. An editor might as well
publish Thucydides with extracts from Diodorus interspersed, or
incorporate the Lives of Suetonius with the History and Annals of
Tacitus. Mr. Croker tells us, indeed, that he has done only what
Boswell wished to do, and was prevented from doing by the law of
copyright. We doubt this greatly. Boswell has studiously
abstained from availing himself of the information given by his
rivals, on many occasions on which he might have cited them
without subjecting himself to the charge of piracy. Mr. Croker
has himself, on one occasion, remarked very justly that Boswell
was unwilling to owe any obligation to Hawkins. But, be this as
it may, if Boswell had quoted from Sir John and from Mrs. Thrale,
he would have been guided by his own taste and judgment in
selecting his quotations. On what Boswell quoted he would have
commented with perfect freedom; and the borrowed passages, so
selected, and accompanied by such comments, would have become
original. They would have dove-tailed into the work. No hitch, no
crease, would have been discernible. The whole would appear one
and indivisible,

<blockquote>

"Ut per l&aelig;ve severos<br>
Effundat junctura ungues."

</blockquote>

This is not the case with Mr. Croker's insertions. They are not
chosen as Boswell would have chosen them. They are not introduced
as Boswell would have introduced them. They differ from the
quotations scattered through the original Life of Johnson, as a
withered bough stuck in the ground differs from a tree skilfully
transplanted with all its life about it.<p>

Not only do these anecdotes disfigure Boswell's book; they are
themselves disfigured by being inserted in his book. The charm of
Mrs. Thrale's little volume is utterly destroyed. The feminine
quickness of observation, the feminine softness of heart, the
colloquial incorrectness and vivacity of style, the little
amusing airs of a half-learned lady, the delightful garrulity,
the "dear Doctor Johnson," the "it was so so comical," all
disappear in Mr. Croker's quotations. The lady ceases to speak in
the first person; and her anecdotes, in the process of
transfusion, become as flat as Champagne in decanters, or
Herodotus in Beloe's version. Sir John Hawkins, it is true, loses
nothing; and for the best of reasons. Sir John had nothing to
lose.<p>

The course which Mr. Croker ought to have taken is quite clear.
He should have reprinted Boswell's narrative precisely as Boswell
wrote it; and in the notes or the appendix he should have placed
any anecdotes which he might have thought it advisable to quote
from other writers. This would have been a much more convenient
course for the reader, who has now constantly to keep his eye on
the margin in order to see whether he is perusing Boswell, Mrs.
Thrale, Murphy, Hawkins, Tyers, Cradock, or Mr. Croker. We
greatly doubt whether even the Tour to the Hebrides ought to have
been inserted in the midst of the Life. There is one marked
distinction between the two works. Most of the Tour was seen by
Johnson in manuscript. It does not appear that he ever saw any
part of the Life.<p>

We love, we own, to read the great productions of the human mind
as they were written. We have this feeling even about scientific
treatises; though we know that the sciences are always in a state
of progression, and that the alterations made by a modern editor
in an old book on any branch of natural or political philosophy
are likely to be improvements. Some errors have been detected by
writers of this generation in the speculations of Adam Smith. A
short cut has been made to much knowledge at which Sir Isaac
Newton arrived through arduous and circuitous paths. Yet we still
look with peculiar veneration on the Wealth of Nations and on the
Principia, and should regret to see either of those great works
garbled even by the ablest hands. But in works which owe much of
their interest to the character and situation of the writers the
case is infinitely stronger. What man of taste and feeling can
endure <em>rifacimenti</em>, harmonies, abridgments, expurgated
editions? Who ever reads a stage copy of a play when he can
procure the original? Who ever cut open Mrs. Siddons's Milton?
Who ever got through ten pages of Mr. Gilpin's translation of
John Bunyan's Pilgrim into modern English? Who would lose, in the
confusion of a Diatessaron, the peculiar charm which belongs to
the narrative of the disciple whom Jesus loved? The feeling of a
reader who has become intimate with any great original work is
that which Adam expressed towards his bride:

<blockquote>

"Should God create another Eve, and I<br>
Another rib afford, yet loss of thee<br>
Would never from my heart."

</blockquote>

No substitute, however exquisitely formed, will fill the void
left by the original. The second beauty may be equal or superior
to the first; but still it is not she.<p>

The reasons which Mr. Croker has given for incorporating passages
from Sir John Hawkins and Mrs. Thrale with the narrative of
Boswell would vindicate the adulteration of half the classical
works in the language. If Pepys's Diary and Mrs. Hutchinson's
Memoirs had been published a hundred years ago, no human being
can doubt that Mr. Hume would have made great use of those books
in his History of England. But would it, on that account, be
judicious in a writer of our times to publish an edition of
Hume's History of England, in which large extracts from Pepys and
Mrs. Hutchinson should be incorporated with the original text?
Surely not. Hume's history, be its faults what they may, is now
one great entire work, the production of one vigorous mind,
working on such materials as were within its reach. Additions
made by another hand may supply a particular deficiency, but
would grievously injure the general effect. With Boswell's book
the case is stronger. There is scarcely in the whole compass of
literature, a book which bears interpolation so ill. We know no
production of the human mind which has so much of what may be
called the race, so much of the peculiar flavour of the soil from
which it sprang. The work could never have been written if the
writer had not been precisely what he was. His character is
displayed in every page, and this display of character gives a
delightful interest to many passages which have no other
interest.<p>

The Life of Johnson is assuredly a great, a very great work.
Homer is not more decidedly the first of heroic poets, Shakspeare
is not more decidedly the first of dramatists, Demosthenes is not
more decidedly the first of orators, than Boswell is the first of
biographers. He has no second. He has distanced all his
competitors so decidedly that it is not worth while to place
them. Eclipse is first, and the rest nowhere.<p>

We are not sure that there is in the whole history of the human
intellect so strange a ph&aelig;nomenon as this book. Many of
the greatest men that ever lived have written biography. Boswell
was one of the smallest men that ever lived, and he has beaten
them all. He was, if we are to give any credit to his own account
or to the united testimony of all who knew him, a man of the
meanest and feeblest intellect. Johnson described him as a fellow
who had missed his only chance of immortality by not having been
alive when the Dunciad was written. Beauclerk used his name as a
proverbial expression for a bore. He was the laughing-stock of
the whole of that brilliant society which has owed to him the
greater part of its fame. He was always laying himself at the
feet of some eminent man, and begging to be spit upon and
trampled upon. He was always earning some ridiculous nickname,
and then "binding it as a crown unto him," not merely in
metaphor, but literally. He exhibited himself, at the Shakspeare
Jubilee, to all the crowd which filled Stratford-on-Avon, with a
placard round his hat bearing the inscription of Corsica Boswell.
In his Tour, he proclaimed to all the world that at Edinburgh he
was known by the appellation of Paoli Boswell. Servile and
impertinent, shallow and pedantic, a bigot and a sot, bloated
with family pride, and eternally blustering about the dignity of
a born gentleman, yet stooping to be a talebearer, an
eavesdropper, a common butt in the taverns of London, so curious
to know every body who was talked about, that, Tory and high
Churchman as he was, he manoeuvred, we have been told, for an
introduction to Tom Paine, so vain of the most childish
distinctions, that when he had been to court, he drove to the
office where his book was printing without changing his clothes,
and summoned all the printer's devils to admire his new ruffles
and sword; such was this man, and such he was content and proud
to be. Every thing which another man would have hidden, every
thing the publication of which would have made another man hang
himself, was matter of gay and clamorous exultation to his weak
and diseased mind. What silly things he said, what bitter retorts
he provoked, how at one place he was troubled with evil
presentiments which came to nothing, how at another place, on
waking from a drunken doze, he read the prayer-book and took a
hair of the dog that had bitten him, how he went to see men
hanged and came away maudlin, how he added five hundred pounds to
the fortune of one of his babies because she was not scared at
Johnson's ugly face, how he was frightened out of his wits at
sea, and how the sailors quieted him as they would have quieted a
child, how tipsy he was at Lady Cork's one evening and how much
his merriment annoyed the ladies, how impertinent he was to the
Duchess of Argyle and with what stately contempt she put down his
impertinence, how Colonel Macleod sneered to his face at his
impudent obtrusiveness, how his father and the very wife of his
bosom laughed and fretted at his fooleries; all these things he
proclaimed to all the world, as if they had been subjects for
pride and ostentatious rejoicing. All the caprices of his temper,
all the illusions of his vanity, all his hypochondriac whimsies
all his castles in the air, he displayed with a cool
self-complacency, a perfect unconsciousness that he was making a
fool of himself, to which it is impossible to find a parallel in
the whole history of mankind. He has used many people ill; but
assuredly he has used nobody so ill as himself.<p>

That such a man should have written one of the best books in the
world is strange enough. But this is not all. Many persons who
have conducted themselves foolishly in active life, and whose
conversation has indicated no superior powers of mind, have left
us valuable works. Goldsmith was very justly described by one of
his contemporaries as an inspired idiot, and by another as a
being

<blockquote>

"Who wrote like an angel, and talked like poor Poll."

</blockquote>

La Fontaine was in society a mere simpleton. His blunders would
not come in amiss among the stories of Hierocles. But these men
attained literary eminence in spite of their weaknesses. Boswell
attained it by reason of his weaknesses. If he had not been a
great fool, he would never have been a great writer. Without all
the qualities which made him the jest and the torment of those
among whom he lived, without the officiousness, the
inquisitiveness, the effrontery, the toad-eating, the
insensibility to all reproof he never could have produced so
excellent a book. He was a slave, proud of his servitude, a Paul
Pry, convinced that his own curiosity and garrulity were virtues,
an unsafe companion who never scrupled to repay the most liberal
hospitality by the basest violation of confidence, a man without
delicacy, without shame, without sense enough to know when he was
hurting the feelings of others or when he was exposing himself to
derision; and because he was all this, he has, in an important
department of literature, immeasurably surpassed such writers as
Tacitus, Clarendon, Alfieri, and his own idol Johnson.<p>

Of the talents which ordinarily raise men to eminence as writers,
Boswell had absolutely none. There is not in all his books a
single remark of his own on literature, politics, religion, or
society, which is not either commonplace or absurd. His
dissertations on hereditary gentility, on the slave-trade, and on
the entailing of landed estates, may serve as examples. To say
that these passages are sophistical would be to pay them an
extravagant compliment. They have no pretence to argument, or
even to meaning. He has reported innumerable observations made by
himself in the course of conversation. Of those observations we
do not remember one which is above the intellectual capacity of a
boy of fifteen. He has printed many of his own letters, and in
these letters he is always ranting or twaddling. Logic,
eloquence, wit, taste, all those things which are generally
considered as making a book valuable, were utterly wanting to
him. He had, indeed, a quick observation and a retentive memory.
These qualities, if he had been a man of sense and virtue, would
scarcely of themselves have sufficed to make him conspicuous;
but, because he was a dunce, a parasite, and a coxcomb, they have
made him immortal.<p>

Those parts of his book which, considered abstractedly, are most
utterly worthless, are delightful when we read them as
illustrations of the character of the writer. Bad in themselves,
they are good dramatically, like the nonsense of Justice Shallow,
the clipped English of Dr. Caius, or the misplaced consonants of
Fluellen. Of all confessors, Boswell is the most candid. Other
men who have pretended to lay open their own hearts, Rousseau,
for example, and Lord Byron, have evidently written with a
constant view to effect, and are to be then most distrusted when
they seem to be most sincere. There is scarcely any man who would
not rather accuse himself of great crimes and of dark and
tempestuous passions than proclaim all his little vanities and
wild fancies. It would be easier to find a person who would avow
actions like those of C&aelig;sar Borgia or Danton, than one who
would publish a daydream like those of Alnaschar and Malvolio.
Those weaknesses which most men keep covered up in the most
secret places of the mind, not to be disclosed to the eye of
friendship or of love, were precisely the weaknesses which
Boswell paraded before all the world. He was perfectly frank,
because the weakness of his understanding and the tumult of his
spirits prevented him from knowing when he made himself
ridiculous. His book resembles nothing so much as the
conversation of the inmates of the Palace of Truth.<p>

His fame is great; and it will, we have no doubt be lasting; but
it is fame of a peculiar kind, and indeed marvellously resembles
infamy. We remember no other case in which the world has made so
great a distinction between a book and its author. In general,
the book and the author are considered as one. To admire the book
is to admire the author. The case of Boswell is an exception, we
think the only exception, to this rule. His work is universally
allowed to be interesting, instructive, eminently original: yet
it has brought him nothing but contempt. All the world reads it:
all the world delights in it: yet we do not remember ever to have
read or ever to have heard any expression of respect and
admiration for the man to whom we owe so much instruction and
amusement. While edition after edition of his book was coming
forth, his son, as Mr. Croker tells us, was ashamed of it, and
hated to hear it mentioned. This feeling was natural and
reasonable. Sir Alexander saw that, in proportion to the
celebrity of the work, was the degradation of the author. The
very editors of this unfortunate gentleman's books have forgotten
their allegiance, and like those Puritan casuists who took arms
by the authority of the king against his person, have attacked
the writer while doing homage to the writings. Mr. Croker, for
example, has published two thousand five hundred notes on the
life of Johnson, and yet scarcely ever mentions the biographer
whose performance he has taken such pains to illustrate without
some expression of contempt.<p>

An ill-natured man Boswell certainly was not. Yet the malignity
of the most malignant satirist could scarcely cut deeper than his
thoughtless loquacity. Having himself no sensibility to derision
and contempt, he took it for granted that all others were equally
callous. He was not ashamed to exhibit himself to the whole world
as a common spy, a common tattler, a humble companion without the
excuse of poverty, and to tell a hundred stories of his own
pertness and folly, and of the insults which his pertness and
folly brought upon him. It was natural that he should show little
discretion in cases in which the feelings or the honour of others
might be concerned No man, surely, ever published such stories
respecting persons whom he professed to love and revere. He would
infallibly have made his hero as contemptible as he has made
himself, had not his hero really possessed some moral and
intellectual qualities of a very high order. The best proof that
Johnson was really an extraordinary man is that his character,
instead of being degraded, has, on the whole, been decidedly
raised by a work in which all his vices and weaknesses are
exposed more unsparingly than they ever were exposed by Churchill
or by Kenrick.<p>

Johnson grown old, Johnson in the fulness of his fame and in the
enjoyment of a competent fortune, is better known to us than any
other man in history. Every thing about him, his coat, his wig,
his figure, his face, his scrofula, his St. Vitus's dance, his
rolling walk, his blinking eye, the outward signs which too
clearly marked his approbation of his dinner, his insatiable
appetite for fish-sauce and veal-pie with plums, his
inextinguishable thirst for tea, his trick of touching the posts
as he walked, his mysterious practice of treasuring up scraps of
orange-peel, his morning slumbers, his midnight disputations, his
contortions, his mutterings, his gruntings, his puffings, his
vigorous, acute and ready eloquence, his sarcastic wit, his
vehemence, his insolence, his fits of tempestuous rage, his queer
inmates, old Mr. Levett and blind Mrs. Williams, the cat Hodge
and the negro Frank all are as familiar to us as the objects by
which we have been surrounded from childhood. But we have no
minute information respecting those years of Johnson's life
during which his character and his manners became immutably
fixed. We know him, not as he was known to the men of his own
generation, but as he was known to men whose father he might have
been. That celebrated club of which he was the most distinguished
member contained few persons who could remember a time when his
fame was not fully established and his habits completely formed.
He had made himself a name in literature while Reynolds and the
Wartons were still boys. He was about twenty years older than
Burke, Goldsmith, and Gerard Hamilton, about thirty years older
than Gibbon, Beauclerk, and Langton, and about forty years older
than Lord Stowell, Sir William Jones, and Windham. Boswell and
Mrs. Thrale, the two writers from whom we derive most of our
knowledge respecting him, never saw him till long after he was
fifty years old, till most of his great works had become
classical, and till the pension bestowed on him by the Crown had
placed him above poverty. Of those eminent men who were his most
intimate associates towards the close of his life, the only one,
as far as we remember, who knew him during the first ten or
twelve years of his residence in the capital, was David Garrick;
and it does not appear that, during those years, David Garrick
saw much of his fellow-townsman.<p>

Johnson came up to London precisely at the time when the
condition of a man of letters was most miserable and degraded. It
was a dark night between two sunny days. The age of patronage had
passed away. The age of general curiosity and intelligence had
not arrived. The number of readers is at present so great that a
popular author may subsist in comfort and opulence on the profits
of his works. In the reigns of William the Third, of Anne, and of
George the First, even such men as Congreve and Addison would
scarcely have been able to live like gentlemen by the mere sale
of their writings. But the deficiency of the natural demand for
literature was, at the close of the seventeenth and at the
beginning of the eighteenth century, more than made up by
artificial encouragement, by a vast system of bounties and
premiums. There was, perhaps, never a time at which the rewards
of literary merit were so splendid, at which men who could write
well found such easy admittance into the most distinguished
society, and to the highest honours of the state. The chiefs of
both the great parties into which the kingdom was divided
patronised literature with emulous munificence. Congreve, when he
had scarcely attained his majority, was rewarded for his first
comedy with places which made him independent for life. Smith,
though his Hippolytus and Ph&aelig;dra failed, would have been
consoled with three hundred a year but for his own folly. Rowe
was not only Poet Laureate, but also land-surveyor of the customs
in the port of London, clerk of the council to the Prince of
Wales, and secretary of the Presentations to the Lord Chancellor.
Hughes was secretary to the Commissions of the Peace. Ambrose
Philips was judge of the Prerogative Court in Ireland. Locke was
Commissioner of Appeals and of the Board of Trade. Newton was
Master of the Mint. Stepney and Prior were employed in embassies
of high dignity and importance. Gay, who commenced life as
apprentice to a silk mercer, became a secretary of legation at
five-and-twenty. It was to a poem on the Death of Charles the
Second, and to the City and Country Mouse that Montague owed his
introduction into public life, his earldom, his garter, and his
Auditorship of the Exchequer. Swift, but for the unconquerable
prejudice of the queen, would have been a bishop. Oxford, with
his white staff in his hand, passed through the crowd of his
suitors to welcome Parnell, when that ingenious writer deserted
the Whigs. Steele was a commissioner of stamps and a member of
Parliament. Arthur Mainwaring was a commissioner of the customs,
and auditor of the imprest. Tickell was secretary to the Lords
Justices of Ireland. Addison was secretary of state.<p>

This liberal patronage was brought into fashion as it seems, by
the magnificent Dorset, almost the only noble versifier in the
court of Charles the Second who possessed talents for composition
which were independent of the aid of a coronet. Montague owed his
elevation to the favour of Dorset, and imitated through the whole
course of his life the liberality to which he was himself so
greatly indebted. The Tory leaders, Harley and Bolingbroke in
particular, vied with the chiefs of the Whig party in zeal for
the encouragement of letters. But soon after the accession of the
house of Hanover a change took place. The supreme power passed to
a man who cared little for poetry or eloquence. The importance of
the House of Commons was constantly on the increase. The
government was under the necessity of bartering for Parliamentary
support much of that patronage which had been employed in
fostering literary merit; and Walpole was by no means inclined to
divert any part of the fund of corruption to purposes which he
considered as idle. He had eminent talents for government and for
debate. But he had paid little attention to books, and felt
little respect for authors. One of the coarse jokes of his
friend, Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, was far more pleasing to
him than Thomson's Seasons or Richardson's Pamela. He had
observed that some of the distinguished writers whom the favour
of Halifax had turned into statesmen had been mere encumbrances
to their party, dawdlers in office, and mutes in Parliament.
During the whole course of his administration, therefore, he
scarcely befriended a single man of genius. The best writers of
the age gave all their support to the opposition, and contributed
to excite that discontent which, after plunging the nation into a
foolish and unjust war, overthrew the minister to make room for
men less able and equally immoral. The opposition could reward
its eulogists with little more than promises and caresses. St.
James's would give nothing: Leicester house had nothing to
give.<p>

Thus, at the time when Johnson commenced his literary career, a
writer had little to hope from the patronage of powerful
individuals. The patronage of the public did not yet furnish the
means of comfortable subsistence. The prices paid by booksellers
to authors were so low that a man of considerable talents and
unremitting industry could do little more than provide for the
day which was passing over him. The lean kine had eaten up the
fat kine. The thin and withered ears had devoured the good ears.
The season of rich harvests was over, and the period of famine
had begun. All that is squalid and miserable might now be summed
up in the word Poet. That word denoted a creature dressed like a
scarecrow, familiar with compters and spunging-houses, and
perfectly qualified to decide on the comparative merits of the
Common Side in the King's Bench prison and of Mount Scoundrel in
the Fleet. Even the poorest pitied him; and they well might pity
him. For if their condition was equally abject, their aspirings
were not equally high, nor their sense of insult equally acute.
To lodge in a garret up four pair of stairs, to dine in a cellar
among footmen out of place, to translate ten hours a day for the
wages of a ditcher, to be hunted by bailiffs from one haunt of
beggary and pestilence to another, from Grub Street to St.
George's Fields, and from St. George's Fields to the alleys
behind St. Martin's church, to sleep on a bulk in June and amidst
the ashes of a glass-house in December, to die in an hospital and
to be buried in a parish vault, was the fate of more than one
writer who, if he had lived thirty years earlier, would have been
admitted to the sittings of the Kitcat or the Scriblerus club,
would have sat in Parliament, and would have been entrusted with
embassies to the High Allies; who, if he had lived in our time,
would have found encouragement scarcely less munificent in
Albemarle Street or in Paternoster Row.<p>

As every climate has its peculiar diseases, so every walk of life
has its peculiar temptations. The literary character, assuredly,
has always had its share of faults, vanity, jealousy, morbid
sensibility. To these faults were now superadded the faults which
are commonly found in men whose livelihood is precarious, and
whose principles are exposed to the trial of severe distress. All
the vices of the gambler and of the beggar were blended with
those of the author. The prizes in the wretched lottery of
book-making were scarcely less ruinous than the blanks. If good
fortune came, it came in such a manner that it was almost certain
to be abused. After months of starvation and despair, a full
third night or a well-received dedication filled the pocket of
the lean, ragged, unwashed poet with guineas. He hastened to
enjoy those luxuries with the images of which his mind had been
haunted while he was sleeping amidst the cinders and eating
potatoes at the Irish ordinary in Shoe Lane. A week of taverns
soon qualified him for another year of night-cellars. Such was
the life of Savage, of Boyse, and of a crowd of others. Sometimes
blazing in gold-laced hats and waistcoats; sometimes lying in bed
because their coats had gone to pieces, or wearing paper cravats
because their linen was in pawn; sometimes drinking Champagne and
Tokay with Betty Careless; sometimes standing at the window of an
eating-house in Porridge island, to snuff up the scent of what
they could not afford to taste; they knew luxury; they knew
beggary; but they never knew comfort. These men were
irreclaimable. They looked on a regular and frugal life with the
same aversion which an old gipsy or a Mohawk hunter feels for a
stationary abode, and for the restraints and securities of
civilised communities. They were as untameable, as much wedded to
their desolate freedom, as the wild ass. They could no more be
broken in to the offices of social man than the unicorn could be
trained to serve and abide by the crib. It was well if they did
not, like beasts of a still fiercer race, tear the hands which
ministered to their necessities. To assist them was impossible;
and the most benevolent of mankind at length became weary of
giving relief which was dissipated with the wildest profusion as
soon as it had been received. If a sum was bestowed on the
wretched adventurer, such as, properly husbanded, might have
supplied him for six months, it was instantly spent in strange
freaks of sensuality, and, before forty-eight hours had elapsed,
the poet was again pestering all his acquaintance for twopence to
get a plate of shin of beef at a subterraneous cook-shop. If his
friends gave him an asylum in their houses, those houses were
forthwith turned into bagnios and taverns. All order was
destroyed; all business was suspended. The most good-natured host
began to repent of his eagerness to serve a man of genius in
distress when he heard his guest roaring for fresh punch at five
o'clock in the morning.<p>

A few eminent writers were more fortunate. Pope had been raised
above poverty by the active patronage which, in his youth, both
the great political parties had extended to his Homer. Young had
received the only pension ever bestowed, to the best of our
recollection, by Sir Robert Walpole, as the reward of mere
literary merit. One or two of the many poets who attached
themselves to the opposition, Thomson in particular and Mallet,
obtained, after much severe suffering, the means of subsistence
from their political friends. Richardson, like a man of sense,
kept his shop; and his shop kept him, which his novels, admirable
as they are, would scarcely have done. But nothing could be more
deplorable than the state even of the ablest men, who at that
time depended for subsistence on their writings. Johnson,
Collins, Fielding, and Thomson, were certainly four of the most
distinguished persons that England produced during the eighteenth
century. It is well known that they were all four arrested for
debt.<p>

Into calamities and difficulties such as these Johnson plunged in
his twenty-eighth year. From that time till he was three or four
and fifty, we have little information respecting him; little, we
mean, compared with the full and accurate information which we
possess respecting his proceedings and habits towards the close
of his life. He emerged at length from cock-lofts and sixpenny
ordinaries into the society of the polished and the opulent. His
fame was established. A pension sufficient for his wants had been
conferred on him: and he came forth to astonish a generation with
which he had almost as little in common as with Frenchmen or
Spaniards.<p>

In his early years he had occasionally seen the great; but he had
seen them as a beggar. He now came among them as a companion. The
demand for amusement and instruction had, during the course of
twenty years, been gradually increasing. The price of literary
labour had risen; and those rising men of letters with whom
Johnson was henceforth to associate were for the most part
persons widely different from those who had walked about with him
all night in the streets for want of a lodging. Burke, Robertson,
the Wartons, Gray, Mason, Gibbon, Adam Smith, Beattie, Sir
William Jones, Goldsmith, and Churchill, were the most
distinguished writers of what may be called the second generation
of the Johnsonian age. Of these men Churchill was the only one in
whom we can trace the stronger lineaments of that character
which, when Johnson first came up to London, was common among
authors. Of the rest, scarcely any had felt the pressure of
severe poverty. Almost all had been early admitted into the most
respectable society on an equal footing. They were men of quite a
different species from the dependents of Curll and Osborne.<p>

Johnson came among them the solitary specimen of a past age, the
last survivor of the genuine race of Grub Street hacks; the last
of that generation of authors whose abject misery and whose
dissolute manners had furnished inexhaustible matter to the
satirical genius of Pope. From nature, he had received an uncouth
figure, a diseased constitution, and an irritable temper. The
manner in which the earlier years of his manhood had been passed
had given to his demeanour, and even to his moral character, some
peculiarities appalling to the civilised beings who were the
companions of his old age. The perverse irregularity of his
hours, the slovenliness of his person, his fits of strenuous
exertion, interrupted by long intervals of sluggishness, his
strange abstinence, and his equally strange voracity, his active
benevolence, contrasted with the constant rudeness and the
occasional ferocity of his manners in society, made him, in the
opinion of those with whom he lived during the last twenty years
of his life, a complete original. An original he was,
undoubtedly, in some respects. But if we possessed full
information concerning those who shared his early hardships, we
should probably find that what we call his singularities of
manner were, for the most part, failings which he had in common
with the class to which he belonged. He ate at Streatham Park as
he had been used to eat behind the screen at St. John's Gate,
when he was ashamed to show his ragged clothes. He ate as it was
natural that a man should eat, who, during a great part of his
life, had passed the morning in doubt whether he should have food
for the afternoon. The habits of his early life had accustomed
him to bear privation with fortitude, but not to taste pleasure
with moderation. He could fast; but, when he did not fast, he
tore his dinner like a famished wolf, with the veins swelling on
his forehead, and the perspiration running down his cheeks. He
scarcely ever took wine. But when he drank it, he drank it
greedily and in large tumblers. These were, in fact, mitigated
symptoms of that same moral disease which raged with such deadly
malignity in his friends Savage and Boyse. The roughness and
violence which he showed in society were to be expected from a
man whose temper, not naturally gentle, had been long tried by
the bitterest calamities, by the want of meat, of fire, and of
clothes, by the importunity of creditors, by the insolence of
booksellers, by the derision of fools, by the insincerity of
patrons, by that bread which is the bitterest of all food, by
those stairs which are the most toilsome of all paths, by that
deferred hope which makes .the heart sick. Through all these
things the ill-dressed, coarse, ungainly pedant had struggled
manfully up to eminence and command. It was natural that, in the
exercise of his power, he should be "eo immitior, quia
toleraverat," that, though his heart was undoubtedly generous and
humane, his demeanour in society should be harsh and despotic.
For severe distress he had sympathy, and not only sympathy, but
munificent relief. But for the suffering which a harsh world
inflicts upon a delicate mind he had no pity; for it was a kind
of suffering which he could scarcely conceive. He would carry
home on his shoulders a sick and starving girl from the streets.
He turned his house into a place of refuge for a crowd of
wretched old creatures who could find no other asylum; nor could
all their peevishness and ingratitude weary out his benevolence.
But the pangs of wounded vanity seemed to him ridiculous; and he
scarcely felt sufficient compassion even for the pangs of wounded
affection. He had seen and felt so much of sharp misery, that he
was not affected by paltry vexations; and he seemed to think that
everybody ought to be as much hardened to those vexations as
himself. He was angry with Boswell for complaining of a headache,
with Mrs. Thrale for grumbling about the dust on the road, or the
smell of the kitchen. These were, in his phrase, "foppish
lamentations," which people ought to be ashamed to utter in a
world so full of sin and sorrow. Goldsmith crying because the
Good-natured Man had failed, inspired him with no pity. Though
his own health was not good, he detested and despised
valetudinarians. Pecuniary losses, unless they reduced the loser
absolutely to beggary, moved him very little. People whose hearts
had been softened by prosperity might weep, he said, for such
events; but all that could be expected of a plain man was not to
laugh. He was not much moved even by the spectacle of Lady
Tavistock dying of a broken heart for the loss of her lord. Such
grief he considered as a luxury reserved for the idle and the
wealthy. A washerwoman, left a widow with nine small children,
would not have sobbed herself to death.<p>

A person who troubled himself so little about small or
sentimental grievances was not likely to be very attentive to the
feelings of others in the ordinary intercourse of society. He
could not understand how a sarcasm or a reprimand could make any
man really unhappy. "My dear doctor," said he to Goldsmith, "what
harm does it do to a man to call him Holofernes?" "Pooh, ma'am,"
he exclaimed to Mrs. Carter, "who is the worse for being talked
of uncharitably?" Politeness has been well defined as benevolence
in small things. Johnson was impolite, not because he wanted
benevolence, but because small things appeared smaller to him
than to people who had never known what it was to live for
four-pence halfpenny a day.<p>

The characteristic peculiarity of his intellect was the union of
great powers with low prejudices. If we judged of him by the best
parts of his mind, we should place him almost as high as he was
placed by the idolatry of Boswell; if by the worst parts of his
mind, we should place him even below Boswell himself. Where he
was not under the influence of some strange scruple or some
domineering passion, which prevented him from boldly and fairly
investigating a subject, he was a wary and acute reasoner, a
little too much inclined to scepticism, and a little too fond of
paradox. No man was less likely to be imposed upon by fallacies
in argument or by exaggerated statements of fact. But if, while
he was beating down sophisms and exposing false testimony, some
childish prejudices, such as would excite laughter in a well
managed nursery, came across him, he was smitten, as if by
enchantment. His mind dwindled away under the spell from gigantic
elevation to dwarfish littleness Those who had lately been
admiring its amplitude and its force were now as much astonished
at its strange narrowness and feebleness as the fisherman in the
Arabian tale, when he saw the Genie, whose stature had
overshadowed the whole sea-coast, and whose might seemed equal to
a contest with armies, contract himself to the dimensions of his
small prison, and lie there the helpless slave of the charm of
Solomon.<p>

Johnson was in the habit of sifting with extreme severity the
evidence for all stories which were merely odd. But when they
were not only odd but miraculous, his severity relaxed. He began
to be credulous precisely at the point where the most credulous
people begin to be sceptical. It is curious to observe, both in
his writings and in his conversation, the contrast between the
disdainful manner in which he rejects unauthenticated anecdotes,
even when they are consistent with the general laws of nature,
and the respectful manner in which he mentions the wildest
stories relating to the invisible world. A man who told him of a
waterspout or a meteoric stone generally had the lie direct given
him for his pains. A man who told him of a prediction or a dream
wonderfully accomplished was sure of a courteous hearing.
"Johnson," observed Hogarth, "like King David, says in his haste
that all men are liars." "His incredulity," says Mrs. Thrale,
"amounted almost to disease." She tells us how he browbeat a
gentleman who gave him an account of a hurricane in the West
Indies, and a poor quaker who related some strange circumstance
about the red-hot balls fired at the siege of Gibraltar. "It is
not so. It cannot be true. Don't tell that story again. You
cannot think how poor a figure you make in telling it." He once
said, half jestingly we suppose, that for six months he refused
to credit the fact of the earthquake at Lisbon, and that he still
believed the extent of the calamity to be greatly exaggerated.
Yet he related with a grave face how old Mr. Cave of St. John's
Gate saw a ghost, and how this ghost was something of a shadowy
being. He went himself on a ghost hunt to Cock Lane, and was
angry with John Wesley for not following up another scent of the
same kind with proper spirit and perseverance. He rejects the
Celtic genealogies and poems without the least hesitation; yet he
declares himself willing to believe the stories of the second
sight. If he had examined the claims of the Highland seers with
half the severity with which he sifted the evidence for the
genuineness of Fingal, he would, we suspect, have come away from
Scotland with a mind fully made up. In his Lives of the Poets, we
find that he is unwilling to give credit to the accounts of Lord
Roscommon's early proficiency in his studies: but he tells with
great solemnity an absurd romance about some intelligence
preternaturally impressed on the mind of that nobleman. He avows
himself to be in great doubt about the truth of the story, and
ends by warning his readers not wholly to slight such
impressions.<p>

Many of his sentiments on religious subjects are worthy of a
liberal and enlarged mind. He could discern clearly enough the
folly and meanness of all bigotry except his own. When he spoke
of the scruples of the Puritans, he spoke like a person who had
really obtained an insight into the divine philosophy of the New
Testament, and who considered Christianity as a noble scheme of
government, tending to promote the happiness and to elevate the
moral nature of man. The horror which the sectaries felt for
cards, Christmas ale, plum-porridge, mince pies, and dancing
bears, excited his contempt. To the arguments urged by some very
worthy people against showy dress he replied with admirable sense
and spirit, "Let us not be found, when our Master calls us,
stripping the lace off our waistcoats, but the spirit of
contention from our souls and tongues. Alas! sir, a man who
cannot get to heaven in a green coat will not find his way
thither the sooner in a grey one." Yet he was himself under the
tyranny of scruples as unreasonable as those of Hudibras or
Ralpho, and carried his zeal for ceremonies and for
ecclesiastical dignities to lengths altogether inconsistent with
reason or with Christian charity. He has gravely noted down in
his diary that he once committed the sin of drinking coffee on
Good Friday. In Scotland, he thought it his duty to pass several
months without joining in public worship, solely because the
ministers of the kirk had not been ordained by bishops. His mode
of estimating the piety of his neighbours was somewhat singular.
"Campbell," said he, "is a good man, a pious man. I am afraid he
has not been in the inside of a church for many years; but he
never passes a church without pulling off his hat: this shows he
has good principles." Spain and Sicily must surely contain many
pious robbers and well-principled assassins. Johnson could easily
see that a Roundhead who named all his children after Solomon's
singers, and talked in the House of Commons about seeking the
Lord, might be an unprincipled villain whose religious mummeries
only aggravated his guilt. But a man who took off his hat when he
passed a church episcopally consecrated must be a good man, a
pious man, a man of good principles. Johnson could easily see
that those persons who looked on a dance or a laced waistcoat as
sinful, deemed most ignobly of the attributes of God and of the
ends of revelation. But with what a storm of invective he would
have overwhelmed any man who had blamed him for celebrating the
redemption of mankind with sugarless tea and butterless buns.<p>

Nobody spoke more contemptuously of the cant of patriotism.
Nobody saw more clearly the error of those who regarded liberty,
not as a means, but as an end, and who proposed to themselves, as
the object of their pursuit, the prosperity of the state as
distinct from the prosperity of the individuals who compose the
state. His calm and settled opinion seems to have been that forms
of government have little or no influence on the happiness of
society. This opinion, erroneous as it is, ought at least to have
preserved him from all intemperance on political questions. It
did not, however, preserve him from the lowest, fiercest, and
most absurd extravagances of party-spirit, from rants which, in
every thing but the diction, resembled those of Squire Western.
He was, as a politician, half ice and half fire. On the side of
his intellect he was a mere Pococurante, far too apathetic about
public affairs, far too sceptical as to the good or evil tendency
of any form of polity. His passions on the contrary, were violent
even to slaying against all who leaned to Whiggish principles.
The well-known lines which he inserted in Goldsmith's Traveller
express what seems to have been his deliberate judgment:

<blockquote>

"How small, of all that human hearts endure,<br>
That part which kings or laws can cause or cure!"

</blockquote>

He had previously put expressions very similar into the mouth of
Rasselas. It is amusing to contrast these passages with the
torrents of raving abuse which he poured forth against the Long
Parliament and the American Congress. In one of the conversations
reported by Boswell this inconsistency displays itself in the
most ludicrous manner.<p>

"Sir Adam Ferguson," says Boswell, "suggested that luxury
corrupts a people, and destroys the spirit of liberty." JOHNSON:
"Sir, that is all visionary. I would not give half a guinea to
live under one form of government rather than another. It is of
no moment to the happiness of an individual. Sir, the danger of
the abuse of power is nothing to a private man. What Frenchman is
prevented passing his life as he pleases?" SIR ADAM: "But, sir,
in the British constitution it is surely of importance to keep up
a spirit in the people, so as to preserve a balance against the
crown." JOHNSON: "Sir, I perceive you are a vile Whig. Why all
this childish jealousy of the power of the crown? The crown has
not power enough."<p>

One of the old philosophers, Lord Bacon tells us, used to say
that life and death were just the same to him. "Why then," said
an objector, "do you not kill yourself?" The philosopher
answered, "Because it is just the same." If the difference
between two forms of government be not worth half a guinea, it is
not easy to see how Whiggism can be viler than Toryism, or how
the crown can have too little power. If the happiness of
individuals is not affected by political abuses, zeal for liberty
is doubtless ridiculous. But zeal for monarchy must be equally
so. No person would have been more quick-sighted than Johnson to
such a contradiction as this in the logic of an antagonist.<p>

The judgments which Johnson passed on books were, in his own
time, regarded with superstitious veneration, and, in our time,
are generally treated with indiscriminate contempt. They are the
judgments of a strong but enslaved understanding. The mind of the
critic was hedged round by an uninterrupted fence of prejudices
and superstitions. Within his narrow limits, he displayed a
vigour and an activity which ought to have enabled him to clear
the barrier that confined him.<p>

How it chanced that a man who reasoned on his premises so ably,
should assume his premises so foolishly, is one of the great
mysteries of human nature. The same inconsistency may be observed
in the schoolmen of the middle ages. Those writers show so much
acuteness and force of mind in arguing on their wretched data,
that a modern reader is perpetually at a loss to comprehend how
such minds came by such data. Not a flaw in the superstructure of
the theory which they are rearing escapes their vigilance. Yet
they are blind to the obvious unsoundness of the foundation. It
is the same with some eminent lawyers. Their legal arguments are
intellectual prodigies, abounding with the happiest analogies and
the most refined distinctions. The principles of their arbitrary
science being once admitted, the statute-book and the reports
being once assumed as the foundations of reasoning, these men
must be allowed to be perfect masters of logic. But if a question
arises as to the postulates on which their whole system rests, if
they are called upon to vindicate the fundamental maxims of that
system which they have passed their lives in studying, these very
men often talk the language of savages or of children. Those who
have listened to a man of this class in his own court, and who
have witnessed the skill with which he analyses and digests a
vast mass of evidence, or reconciles a crowd of precedents which
at first sight seem contradictory, scarcely know him again when,
a few hours later, they hear him speaking on the other side of
Westminster Hall in his capacity of legislator. They can scarcely
believe that the paltry quirks which are faintly heard through a
storm of coughing, and which do not impose on the plainest
country gentleman, can proceed from the same sharp and vigorous
intellect which had excited their admiration under the same roof,
and on the same day.<p>

Johnson decided literary questions like a lawyer, not like a
legislator. He never examined foundations where a point was
already ruled. His whole code of criticism rested on pure
assumption, for which he sometimes quoted a precedent or an
authority, but rarely troubled himself to give a reason drawn
from the nature of things. He took it for granted that the kind
of poetry which flourished in his own time, which he had been
accustomed to hear praised from his childhood, and which he had
himself written with success, was the best kind of poetry. In his
biographical work he has repeatedly laid it down as an undeniable
proposition that during the latter part of the seventeenth
century, and the earlier part of the eighteenth, English poetry
had been in a constant progress of improvement. Waller, Denham,
Dryden, and Pope, had been, according to him, the great
reformers. He judged of all works of the imagination by the
standard established among his own contemporaries. Though he
allowed Homer to have been a greater man than Virgil, he seems to
have thought the &AElig;neid a greater poem than the Iliad.
Indeed he well might have thought so; for he preferred Pope's
Iliad to Homer's. He pronounced that, after Hoole's translation
of Tasso, Fairfax's would hardly be reprinted. He could see no
merit in our fine old English ballads, and always spoke with the
most provoking contempt of Percy's fondness for them. Of the
great original works of imagination which appeared during his
time, Richardson's novels alone excited his admiration. He could
see little or no merit in Tom Jones, in Gulliver's Travels, or in
Tristram Shandy. To Thomson's Castle of Indolence, he vouchsafed
only a line of cold commendation, of commendation much colder
than what he has bestowed on the Creation of that portentous
bore, Sir Richard Blackmore. Gray was, in his dialect, a barren
rascal. Churchill was a blockhead. The contempt which he felt for
the trash of Macpherson was indeed just, but it was, we suspect,
just by chance. He despised the Fingal for the very reason which
led many men of genius to admire it. He despised it, not because
it was essentially common-place, but because it had a superficial
air of originality.<p>

He was undoubtedly an excellent judge of compositions fashioned
on his own principles. But when a deeper philosophy was required,
when he undertook to pronounce judgment on the works of those
great minds which "yield homage only to eternal laws," his
failure was ignominious. He criticised Pope's Epitaphs
excellently. But his observations on Shakspeare's plays and
Milton's poems seem to us for the most part as wretched as if
they had been written by Rymer himself, whom we take to have been
the worst critic that ever lived.<p>

Some of Johnson's whims on literary subjects can be compared only
to that strange nervous feeling which made him uneasy if he had
not touched every post between the Mitre tavern and his own
lodgings. His preference of Latin epitaphs to English epitaphs is
an instance. An English epitaph, he said, would disgrace
Smollett. He declared that he would not pollute the walls of
Westminster Abbey with an English epitaph on Goldsmith. What
reason there can be for celebrating a British writer in Latin,
which there was not for covering the Roman arches of triumph with
Greek inscriptions, or for commemorating the deeds of the heroes
of Thermopyl&aelig; in Egyptian hieroglyphics, we are utterly
unable to imagine.<p>

On men and manners, at least on the men and manners of a
particular place and a particular age, Johnson had certainly
looked with a most observant and discriminating eye. His remarks
on the education of children, on marriage, on the economy of
families, on the rules of society, are always striking, and
generally sound. In his writings, indeed, the knowledge of life
which he possessed in an eminent degree is very imperfectly
exhibited. Like those unfortunate chiefs of the middle ages who
were suffocated by their own chain-mail and cloth of gold, his
maxims perish under that load of words which was designed for
their defence and their ornament. But it is clear from the
remains of his conversation, that he had more of that homely
wisdom which nothing but experience and observation can give than
any writer since the time of Swift. If he had been content to
write as he talked, he might have left books on the practical art
of living superior to the Directions to Servants.<p>

Yet even his remarks on society, like his remarks on literatures
indicate a mind at least as remarkable for narrowness as for
strength. He was no master of the great science of human nature.
He had studied, not the genus man, but the species Londoner.
Nobody was ever so thoroughly conversant with all the forms of
life and all the shades of moral and intellectual character which
were to be seen from Islington to the Thames, and from Hyde-Park
corner to Mile-end green. But his philosophy stopped at the first
turnpike-gate. Of the rural life of England he knew nothing, and
he took it for granted that every body who lived in the country
was either stupid or miserable. "Country gentlemen," said he,
"must be unhappy; for they have not enough to keep their lives in
motion; "as if all those peculiar habits and associations which
made Fleet Street and Charing Cross the finest views in the world
to himself had been essential parts of human nature. Of remote
countries and past times he talked with wild and ignorant
presumption. "The Athenians of the age of Demosthenes," he said
to Mrs. Thrale, "were a people of brutes, a barbarous people." In
conversation with Sir Adam Ferguson he used similar language.
"The boasted Athenians," he said, "were barbarians. The mass of
every people must be barbarous where there is no printing." The
fact was this: he saw that a Londoner who could not read was a
very stupid and brutal fellow: he saw that great refinement of
taste and activity of intellect were rarely found in a Londoner
who had not read much; and, because it was by means of books that
people acquired almost all their knowledge in the society with
which he was acquainted, he concluded, in defiance of the
strongest and clearest evidence that the human mind can be
cultivated by means of books alone. An Athenian citizen might
possess very few volumes; and the largest library to which he had
access might be much less valuable than Johnson's bookcase in
Bolt Court. But the Athenian might pass every morning in
conversation with Socrates, and might hear Pericles speak four or
five times every month. He saw the plays of Sophocles and
Aristophanes: he walked amidst the friezes of Phidias and the
paintings of Zeuxis: he knew by heart the choruses of
&AElig;schylus: he heard the rhapsodist at the corner of the
street reciting the Shield of Achilles or the Death of Argus: he
was a legislator, conversant with high questions of alliance,
revenue, and war: he was a soldier, trained under a liberal and
generous discipline: he was a judge, compelled every day to weigh
the effect of opposite arguments. These things were in themselves
an education, an education eminently fitted, not, indeed, to form
exact or profound thinkers, but to give quickness to the
perceptions, delicacy to the taste, fluency to the expression,
and politeness to the manners. All this was overlooked. An
Athenian who did not improve his mind by reading was, in
Johnson's opinion, much such a person as a Cockney who made his
mark, much such a person as black Frank before he went to school,
and far inferior to a parish clerk or a printer's devil.<p>

Johnson's friends have allowed that he carried to a ridiculous
extreme his unjust contempt for foreigners. He pronounced the
French to be a very silly people, much behind us, stupid,
ignorant creatures. And this judgment he formed after having been
at Paris about a month, during which he would not talk French,
for fear of giving the natives an advantage over him in
conversation. He pronounced them, also, to be an indelicate
people, because a French footman touched the sugar with his
fingers. That ingenious and amusing traveller, M. Simond, has
defended his countrymen very successfully against Johnson's
accusation, and has pointed out some English practices which, to
an impartial spectator, would seem at least as inconsistent with
physical cleanliness and social decorum as those which Johnson so
bitterly reprehended. To the sage, as Boswell loves to call him,
it never occurred to doubt that there must be something eternally
and immutably good in the usages to which he had been accustomed.
In fact, Johnson's remarks on society beyond the bills of
mortality, are generally of much the same kind with those of
honest Tom Dawson, the English footman in Dr. Moore's Zeluco.
"Suppose the king of France has no sons, but only a daughter,
then, when the king dies, this here daughter, according to that
there law, cannot be made queen, but the next near relative,
provided he is a man, is made king, and not the last king's
daughter, which, to be sure, is very unjust. The French
footguards are dressed in blue, and all the marching regiments in
white, which has a very foolish appearance for soldiers; and as
for blue regimentals, it is only fit for the blue horse or the
artillery."<p>

Johnson's visit to the Hebrides introduced him to a state of
society completely new to him; and a salutary suspicion of his
own deficiencies seems on that occasion to have crossed his mind
for the first time. He confessed, in the last paragraph of his
Journey, that his thoughts on national manners were the thoughts
of one who had seen but little, of one who had passed his time
almost wholly in cities. This feeling, however, soon passed away.
It is remarkable that to the last he entertained a fixed contempt
for all those modes of life and those studies which tend to
emancipate the mind from the prejudices of a particular age or a
particular nation. Of foreign travel and of history he spoke with
the fierce and boisterous contempt of ignorance. "What does a man
learn by travelling? Is Beauclerk the better for travelling? What
did Lord Charlemont learn in his travels, except that there was a
snake in one of the pyramids of Egypt?" History was, in his
opinion, to use the fine expression of Lord Plunkett, an old
almanack: historians could, as he conceived, claim no higher
dignity than that of almanack-makers; and his favourite
historians were those who, like Lord Hailes, aspired to no higher
dignity. He always spoke with contempt of Robertson. Hume he
would not even read. He affronted one of his friends for talking
to him about Catiline's conspiracy, and declared that he never
desired to hear of the Punic war again as long as he lived.<p>

Assuredly one fact which does not directly affect our own
interests, considered in itself, is no better worth knowing than
another fact. The fact that there is a snake in a pyramid, or the
fact that Hannibal crossed the Alps, are in themselves as
unprofitable to us as the fact that there is a green blind in a
particular house in Threadneedle Street, or the fact that a Mr.
Smith comes in to the city every morning on the top of one of the
Blackwall stages. But it is certain that those who will not crack
the shell of history will never get at the kernel. Johnson, with
hasty arrogance, pronounced the kernel worthless, because he saw
no value in the shell. The real use of travelling to distant
countries and of studying the annals of past times is to preserve
men from the contraction of mind which those can hardly escape
whose whole communion is with one generation and one
neighbourhood, who arrive at conclusions by means of an induction
not sufficiently copious, and who therefore constantly confound
exceptions with rules, and accidents with essential properties.
In short, the real use of travelling and of studying history is
to keep men from being what Tom Dawson was in fiction, and Samuel
Johnson in reality.<p>

Johnson, as Mr. Burke most justly observed, appears far greater
in Boswell's books than in his own. His conversation appears to
have been quite equal to his writings in matter, and far superior
to them in manner. When he talked, he clothed his wit and his
sense in forcible and natural expressions. As soon as he took his
pen in his hand to write for the public, his style became
systematically vicious. All his books are written in a learned
language, in a language which nobody hears from his mother or his
nurse, in a language in which nobody ever quarrels, or drives
bargains, or makes love, in a language in which nobody ever
thinks. It is clear that Johnson himself did not think in the
dialect in which he wrote. The expressions which came first to
his tongue were simple, energetic, and picturesque. When he wrote
for publication, he did his sentences out of English into
Johnsonese. His letters from the Hebrides to Mrs. Thrale are the
original of that work of which the Journey to the Hebrides is the
translation; and it is amusing to compare the two versions. "When
we were taken up stairs," says he in one of his letters, "a dirty
fellow bounced out of the bed on which one of us was to lie."
This incident is recorded in the Journey as follows: "Out of one
of the beds on which we were to repose started up, at our
entrance, a man black as a Cyclops from the forge." Sometimes
Johnson translated aloud. "The Rehearsal," he said, very
unjustly, "has not wit enough to keep it sweet ;" then, after a
pause, "it has not vitality enough to preserve it from
putrefaction."<p>

Mannerism is pardonable, and is sometimes even agreeable, when
the manner, though vicious, is natural. Few readers, for example,
would be willing to part with the mannerism of Milton or of
Burke. But a mannerism which does not sit easy on the mannerist,
which has been adopted on principle, and which can be sustained
only by constant effort, is always offensive. And such is the
mannerism of Johnson.<p>

The characteristic faults of his style are so familiar to all our
readers, and have been so often burlesqued, that it is almost
superfluous to point them out. It is well known that he made less
use than any other eminent writer of those strong plain words,
Anglo-Saxon or Norman-French, of which the roots lie in the
inmost depths of our language; and that he felt a vicious
partiality for terms which, long after our own speech had been
fixed, were borrowed from the Greek and Latin, and which,
therefore, even when lawfully naturalised, must be considered as
born aliens, not entitled to rank with the king's English. His
constant practice of padding out a sentence with useless
epithets, till it became as stiff as the bust of an exquisite,
his antithetical forms of expression, constantly employed even
where there is no opposition in the ideas expressed, his big
words wasted on little things, his harsh inversions, so widely
different from those graceful and easy inversions which give
variety, spirit, and sweetness to the expression of our great old
writers, all these peculiarities have been imitated by his
admirers and parodied by his assailants, till the public has
become sick of the subject.<p>

Goldsmith said to him, very wittily and very justly, "If you were
to write a fable about little fishes, doctor, you would make the
little fishes talk like whales." No man surely ever had so little
talent for personation as Johnson. Whether he wrote in the
character of a disappointed legacy-hunter or an empty town fop,
of a crazy virtuoso or a flippant coquette, he wrote in the same
pompous and unbending style. His speech, like Sir Piercy
Shafton's Euphuistic eloquence, bewrayed him under every
disguise. Euphelia and Rhodoclea talk as finely as Imlac the poet
or Seged, Emperor of Ethiopia. The gay Cornelia describes her
reception at the country-house of her relations, in such terms as
these: "I was surprised, after the civilities of my first
reception, to find, instead of the leisure and tranquillity which
a rural life always promises, and, if well conducted, might
always afford, a confused wildness of care, and a tumultuous
hurry of diligence, by which every face was clouded, and every
motion agitated." The gentle Tranquilla informs us, that she "had
not passed the earlier part of life without the flattery of
courtship, and the joys of triumph; but had danced the round of
gaiety amidst the murmurs of envy and the gratulations of
applause, had been attended from pleasure to pleasure by the
great, the sprightly, and the vain, and had seen her regard
solicited by the obsequiousness of gallantry, the gaiety of wit,
and the timidity of love." Surely Sir John Falstaff himself did
not wear his petticoats with a worse grace. The reader may well
cry out, with honest Sir Hugh Evans, "I like not when a 'oman has
a great peard: I spy a great peard under her muffler."<p>

We had something more to say. But our article is already too
long; and we must close it. We would fain part in good humour
from the hero, from the biographer, and even from the editor who,
ill as he has performed his task, has at least this claim to our
gratitude, that he has induced us to read Boswell's book again.
As we close it, the club-room is before us, and the table on
which stands the omelet for Nugent, and the lemons for Johnson.
There are assembled those heads which live for ever on the
canvass of Reynolds. There are the spectacles of Burke and the
tall thin form of Langton, the courtly sneer of Beauclerk and the
beaming smile of Garrick, Gibbon tapping his snuff-box and Sir
Joshua with his trumpet in his ear. In the foreground is that
strange figure which is as familiar to us as the figures of those
among whom we have been brought up, the gigantic body, the huge
massy face, seamed with the scars of disease, the brown coat, the
black worsted stockings, the grey wig with the scorched foretop,
the dirty hands, the nails bitten and pared to the quick. We see
the eyes and mouth moving with convulsive twitches; we see the
heavy form rolling, we hear it puffing; and then comes the "Why,
sir!" and the "What then, sir?" and the "No, sir;" and the "You
don't see your way through the question, sir!"<p>

What a singular destiny has been that of this remarkable man! To
be regarded in his own age as a classic, and in ours as a
companion! To receive from his contemporaries that full homage
which men of genius have in general received only from posterity!
To be more intimately known to posterity than other men are known
to their contemporaries! That kind of fame which is commonly the
most transient is, in his case, the most durable. The reputation
of those writings, which he probably expected to be immortal, is
every day fading; while those peculiarities of manner and that
careless table-talk the memory of which, he probably thought,
would die with him, are likely to be remembered as long as the
English language is spoken in any quarter of the globe.

<!-- master.com.content -->

</body>

</html>
